Title: Is AI the First Technology Doctors Actually Trust? Robert Wachter, Author & Chair of Medicine, UCSF
Channel: Analyzing Healthcare by SCALE Community 
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0x_7bZYQ8iU
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

You focused a lot on unintended consequences of the EMR roll out. Give us areas with with these AI solutions of what some of the unintended consequences are that we should keep on our radar. The AI has already reached a stage where it's good enough to be useful and yet not good enough to trust independently. And so you're going to have this very funky diad of the quote doctor in the loop that the being the final arbiter of of an AI recommendation. and a lot of there's a lot of mischief that can happen there. Humans are not good at staying alert when they have a generally trusted technology. We will deskkill. You're already seeing human in the loop screws things up. The AI by itself is better than the human AI diad. So there's there's there's a lot of complexity. Welcome to the analyzing healthcare podcast brought to you by scale community. Scale is a global healthcare focused member network where healthcare leaders come to connect, learn, share ideas, and shape what's next in our evolving healthcare landscape. To take advantage of all that Scale Community has to offer, from expansive content to virtual and inerson events to interactive peer networking opportunities and more, check out Scale Community at www.scale- community.com. Membership options range from free to paid. So, if you enjoyed today's discussion, please take a moment to sign up for your preferred membership level. All right, welcome to the next episode of the analyzing healthcare podcast by scale community. I'm pleased to be joined by Dr. Bob Wter. Bob is the professor and chair of the department of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco. And previously, Bob was the president of the Society of Hospital Medicine, past chair of the American Board of Internal Medicine, and author of several books. Uh, one that was the New York Times bestseller science list, and another that's coming up, uh, over the coming out over the coming weeks and months, which we're here to talk about today, focused on AI and technology adoption in healthcare. So, Bob, welcome to the podcast. >> Thank you, Jason. Good to be here. So maybe before we come into to your book and and uh talk about technology, if you can just give a a quick overview of your background uh and and hospital medicine and some of the things that you you focused on over your career prior to really focusing on technology over the past uh decade or 15 years. >> I'll try to keep it short because I'm pretty old. Um grew up in New York. Neither parent went to college. Went to college med school at Penn and uh was a polysai major in college which I think explains a lot. I tell people on what happens when a polyai major becomes an academic physician. Meaning I kind of study the system and why it doesn't work very well in in healthcare. And that general focus has led me to evolve over the years to studying how we organize hospital care. And um in 1996 I coined the term hospitalist for a new specialty that was emerging of generalist doctors who took care of you when you were in the hospital which is what I do clinically which became the fastest growing specialty in American history. It's led me to spend a lot of time studying patient safety and medical mistakes and why they happen. During COVID, it led me to study and and do a lot of public communication about COVID. But the last 15 years, I'd say my abiding interest has been in technology and mostly laden with disappointment like why is it that healthcare is so been so late to the dance in terms of digital transformation? uh why are the leading organizations from 20 from 100 years ago in healthcare still the leading organizations whereas in every other walk of life they didn't exist 100 years ago and how can we make healthcare better and safer and more accessible and less expensive using technology and so far the the experience of that has been disappointing I wrote a book 10 years ago called the digital doctor which was really about the early years of that transformation which was largely the main character was the electronic health record and why it had gone so badly and my new book, A Giant Leap, is really about AI and healthcare and why I think it's going to go pretty well. I'm pretty optimistic about it. >> All right. Well, lots to dig into there. And your book, A Giant Leap, how is AI transforming healthcare and what that means for our future? When when does the book come out? >> It comes out February 3rd. >> Okay, great. So, very timely. So uh I I had a chance to take a look at at the advanced copy that you shared and and I thought the beginning was was very interesting context that I wanted to bring out in this conversation. Uh you covered the EMR adoption uh trajectory and also the results uh as a as a core sort of example of technology adoption in healthcare and and then you covered a couple of examples of players that tried to make some early inroads in AI products in the healthcare market that that didn't necessarily go so well. So I wanted to dig into to those as as context. So maybe beginning with the EMR, it sounds like you you are not uh thrilled with the outcome necessarily or some of the results with the EMR implementation process. Look, I would argue that you know there probably flaws which I I think you should look forward to covering, but it's also a good case study of successful technology adoption where lots of change was digested in a fairly short amount of time at a foundational level. Um, and so maybe would good place for us to start is your perspective on, you know, EMR adoption, how that how that played out and what worked and and what you're not so happy with from an impact. >> Yeah, I mean, I've had people read my last book and say, "You're right. We should go back to paper. Those people are psychotic. That's crazy. The EMR, the electronic health record, absolutely made care better and safer and was a major advance." I think my mistake and I think most of my colleagues mistake in thinking about it was that it was the endgame. Going from paper to digital would get us to digital transformation. And what I think we didn't understand is the history of generalpurpose technologies. And when you know when the people in the tech world write about that they're talking about things like the computer, like the internet, like electricity, like the car that really change everything about the nature of of work and sometime sometimes the nature of life. and they never achieve what is hoped in the beginning. Uh and in part because the technologies aren't very good and they iterate and evolve over time but in part because very few industries organizations do the hard work of rethinking the whole nature of how they do everything until the technologies in place. And I think that the reason the electronic health record early years surprised me at least in and and mostly disappointed me was they were doing a lot of good things. I mean, they got rid of my handwriting, which of course was a scourge. When a pharmacy tries to read a prescription that I've scribbled, it's going to make a mistake. It allowed a doctor, two doctors to see the same record at the same time. I mean, really kind of wonderful things. Some basic decision support. It became a little harder to give you a medicine that you were allergic to, but it did not transform medicine, and I think we probably should have anticipated that. And I think in some ways more worrisome, it created a bunch of side effects that were pretty negative. And you know those were captured. If you went to see your doctor over the last 5 or 10 years, you may have noticed that your doctor was had his or her head down pecking away something they never did before when they were scribbling on paper. Because the EMR became an enabler of everybody who cared about what the doctor did, which is a lot of entities. Your your own institution cares about the note that you write because it determines the bill. Your risk manager cares to be sure that you documented things well enough so you didn't get don't get sued. All that kind of stuff. there was now a mechanism to make you do things and the making you do things came in the form of tons of checklists and boxes you had to deal deal with. So it was really frustrating. It really turned doctors into pretty expensive data entry clerks. Couple years later patients got a version of the EMR uh called the patient portal. You probably have one. If your health health organization uses Epic for example, you probably have something called my chart. >> Sounded great. Is great. All in favor of democratizing medicine. But patients were given all sorts of information, including seeing my note without any help in what it meant, what, you know, your magnesium is low and your EKG is abnormal. It's like, what does that mean? Can you schedule an appointment to see me? Well, I have to go on hold on the on the phone. There was a little button at the bottom of the screen that said, send a message to your doctor. So, all of a sudden, doctors had an hour and a half or two hours of additional work every day dealing with this inbox stuff. And so, those nobody anticipated that, but I think those are some of the things that were harder than we anticipated. The EMRs I've come to believe were foundational. You have to have your data in digital form in order to do anything that resembles digital transformation. But they are insufficient to make that happen. And I think we needed the new AI to do that. In part because a lot of our data is not uh computable. I mean I can make sense or computer can make sense of your hemoglobin number or your creatinine number or even your UKGR tracing. Can't make sense of my note or of a textbook. And now now the new AI of course can do that. >> Yeah. Look, it's in some ways it reminds me of uh a story that goes on in in the the the theme of consolidation in the healthcare market where we've had over the past, you know, call it 10 to 15 years significant consolidation both within the hospital market but also outside of the hospital market with corporate MSOs and along the way there's a lot of negative backlash, high performing businesses, businesses that didn't perform so well, controversy over profits in healthcare and what that means. But the alternative that we were or the starting point that we were coming from was a highly fragmented market where you know in 2026 you had very small practices with limited infrastructure, limited management, limited ability to invest in things like technology. And so that that starting point wasn't a great place either. And so we're we we go through these adjustment periods where you know maybe we're taking a a macro step forward but we have to go through a very messy middle ground where we don't necessarily get everything right. uh on the first time around. I want to dig into this topic you mentioned. I think you refer to it as generalpurpose technology. It sounds like you're putting EMRs in a bucket that is fundamentally different than something else. So you've got general purpose technology which is foundational but not necessarily the end goal, not not necessarily what creates the the true transformation, the true productivity gains. And then I imagine you have add-on applications that that come from that. But maybe >> would love for you to to define that and correct me on that understanding. And then also >> I guess I well I guess I I would say about that people people have said to me like why are doctors such lites that you were so late to digitize your field and I said are you kidding come in the the modern hospital even 10 years ago and go to the radiology department or go to the carnary kath lab or the electrophysiology. We love technology, but these were technologies that lived that that served very specialized functions, lived in corners of the hospital where the only people that needed to use them were were specialists in that field. What we had never really done was digital transformation of the entire nature of the way work was done. So I would I really put the electronic health record as sort of the foundational piece of a general purpose technology. We all have to use it. There's no department that is not on the EHR. And the EHR is not only doing the clinical work, it's also doing the billing. It's also doing the supply chain. It's got to do everything. Which is partly why only a couple of companies emerged as winners in the EHR battle despite the fact that GE tried it, IBM tried it, Google tried a version of it, Microsoft, they all failed because it turned out to build this sort of omnibus tool that did everything in medicine, you actually needed to be a specialist in medicine. you need to understand everything about what we do which no general company could do. So I see the electronic health record adoption as being sort of stage one of the general purpose technologies in healthcare and now AI being essentially stage two. >> Healthcare leaders, if your revenue cycle management is underwhelming you, it's time to rethink your current suite of solutions. Scale Healthcare's AI powered RCM solutions are purpose-built to protect and accelerate revenue across the entire life cycle. Denial Shield is an AI solution that proactively prevents and automates the resolution of denials, stopping revenue leakage before claims are even submitted. Front desk Shield supports preclinical, administrative, and front-end RCM functions, incorporating eligibility, prior authorization agents to eliminate friction early in the patient journey. Revenue Shield maximizes revenue by automating coding, charge capture, and revenue integrity functions, ensuring accurate and complete reimbursement. Together, the Shield suite helps organizations reduce operating costs, capture missed revenue, accelerate cash flow, and increase productivity without ripping and replacing existing systems. If you're ready for immediate ROI and measurable impact, visit scale-healthcare.com and see how the Shield suite is redefining AI powered RCM. Do you see EMRs evolving from general purpose technology into specialty technology? And yes, it'll be a limited number of players that really focus on this market like the epics of the world, but their their core foundational product will go will transcend from becoming or from a place of being general purpose technology to becoming a specialist technology or are there simply too many disciplines in healthcare that you really are going to need many specialist add-on applications on top of a general purpose technology platform or is TBD? >> Not so much TBD. I would say that for large healthcare delivery systems, you know, the UCSFs, the Mass Generals, the Kaisers, the common spirits, the Mayos of the world, they need a core enterprise system that does everything that can do everything from primary care to ICU to chemotherapy to transplant that can do everything because this is all integrated together from ordering a medicine to documenting a node to providing clinical decision support to uh sending a prior off to the insurance company. And all of those tasks, some of them are really quite specialized. And the battle here, the battleground really is, do you buy all of those tools from one company? And in this case, Epic or let's say Oracle, which has now bought CERN or the other big general EHR company. Do you buy them all from one company that's building all those tools with the advantages being integration, automatic integration, and that you're pretty confident those companies will be in business in 5 years? or do you buy specialized tools, a prior off tool, a clinical decision support tool, a a AI scribe tool from specialized companies that build those tools? There's no company that's going to survive if all they do is this one use case. So, they're going to need to broaden themselves into platforms. And I think that's an open question. I think Epic has an advantage in that you have they have trust. They're already in they're pricing their their AI tools as a single package. So once you decide you need enough of them, the next one is probably free or close to free. You don't need to worry about integration. You don't need need to worry about them being in business in 5 years. Where there will be specialized tools and the way you're referring to is kind of around clinical specialties is if I'm a small dermatology practice. I'm not buying Epic. I'm buying a dermatology specific electronic health record. And if there's AI that needs to be bolted on, whether that company does it or a third party does it and it gets integrated up, I think that can go either way. I think for physician, the issue is there are fewer and fewer of these standalone specialty medical practices. But the ones that do exist, there are a pretty robust market for an orthopedics electronic health record, a dermatology electronic health record, a primary care electronic health record. But increasingly those practices are being bought by or subsumed under these very large mega health systems. And when they do there's sometimes some kicking and screaming because they love their bespoke tool that is was built for an opthalmologist does but they have to go on the enterprise system or just the whole thing doesn't work. >> So I would love to get your sort of calibrated view of where we are uh in in the adoption of AI technology. So, you know, we went through this phase of the EMR foundational platform being put in place. I suppose that sets us up for AI, although I don't know that that's entirely true because we still have questions about, you know, groups that are on multiple instances of EMRs across their network, interoperability of data, cleanliness of data. Not every organization is truly, you know, ready and willing uh and and able to adopt AI technology, but there's max hype right now. Uh and so the interest is there. Um there you know are lots of dollars being invested into the the supply side in terms of technology companies specialist companies the EMR platforms whether it's Cerner Epic or others are investing in the space. So are we as close to adopting these technologies as the hype would would make us think or do you think we're still in this phase where there's a lot of hype there'll be adoption but there there will be limited sort of true productivity gains by the technology uh in the current phase that we're in. Well, I think the last question is going to be really important because the speed with which this gets bought and implemented is going to be partly based on the experience of health systems deciding did it, you know, I tried something. Did it work? Did it deliver on the promise. Is there ROI I can actually, you know, I there certainly was on the PowerPoint slides when it was being sold to me. Is it real? Is it is it you know I quote Hemingway in the book you know one of the characters in the sun also rises goes bankrupt and another one says to him how does a man go bankrupt? and he answers famously two ways gradually and then suddenly I think we're in the suddenly moment in healthcare we've certainly been in the gradually moment for the last 25 years 30 years I mean there was there were early efforts of AI and healthcare in 1980 and they all flamed out and it went away for 40 years I just give you an example of the speed of adoption so I was on clinical service last two weeks um over the holidays uh in the you know over 10 days 10 12 days I used an AI scribe So when I went in to see a patient where I was gathering a new history from the patient, I took out my phone, I pressed my little button for a scribe built by a company called a bridge, I asked the patient, was okay, recorded the note, but just uh then producing a transcript is not useful. It's actually got to do something kind of fancy, which is move the history around to the right categories in the right order. If they said something about chest pain in the beginning and then five minutes later they something say something else about it, those have to go together. It does that and it does it really quite beautifully. Saves me a couple of minutes and makes me much happier. I actually can look the patient in the eye while we're talking. Then it came I I had some patients whose clinical record which I was supposed to review was lengthy and a study came out last year said the that one out of five patients has a medical record longer than Moby Dick. The idea that in the three minutes I have to do this. I'm going to read 600 pages is impossible. Epic now has rolled out a tool. I could press a button and say summarize this patient's record. It does it in about 30 seconds. I used it. I found it pretty accurate and and useful. Finally, on the wards, I would say 10 times over the course of three hours, I would be with my residents and students and I would say, "Ah, it's interesting. I don't know actually whether hemorrhagic uh tangasia can cause an elevated lactate in the absence of sepsis." That that would have no meaning to a lay person. But it's a question. I would either go wing it before or maybe hope that I would run into my favorite uh specialist in the cafeteria, but I pulled out my either sometimes GPT, sometimes open evidence, which is a specialized decision-m medical knowledgebased tool for physicians, put it in and it particularly open evidence gave me an answer that was credible and probably as good as I would get from a specialist. I use it essentially the way I think of a curbside consult. So it's allowing me as a generalist to have access to specialty level knowledge. Those tools are real today. They're being used by almost everybody here at UCSF and that's just in, you know, none of them existed two years ago. So that's pretty rapid adoption and I think quite importantly sets a stage for more robust ambitious adoption because it's buying my trust and buy in. And now I'm and I'm I'm obviously not a lite but I have colleagues who are very skeptical of this. They're using these tools. It's like, well, this is pretty good. It makes my life easier and better, and I think it opens them to the next tool. >> So, it sounds like the effectiveness of the tools is what is making you more optimistic that we're at that point of of rapid adoption, broader adoption relative to, you know, where we were prior to two years ago. Is is is that what the key driver? >> I'd say there are I'd say there are two things that are making me optimistic. One is the tools are different than anything we've ever had before. You know, we had amazing electronic knowledgebased tools. The main one is called up to date. I can say to upto-date what's the right dose of a tov of a statin for a patient with with a high cholesterol. I can you know ask a s a simple linear question kind of the way you'd ask Google. I cannot put into up to date I've got an 84 year old patient with lymphomaid granulomitosis who comes in with a fever shortness of breath and elevated uh creatinine and an infiltrate on a chest x-ray. What do you think is going on? It would sputter and have no idea what I'm doing. I certainly couldn't put in my elect my note, you know, my my clinical documentation into up to date. So, the ability of it to deal with human language and produce an output that is in human language and is relatively accurate is part of what gets me excited. The other part which is really important is three years ago on November 30th, 2022 when GPT came out, it wasn't like I was sitting there and saying, "I need something better than Google." or when I would be driving in an Uber, I'd say, "Oh, I really need a driverless car, which I use, you know, Whimo once a week now." It wasn't like the tools that we had were were not working. It was just that there are better were better tools fueled by AI that were on the horizon. When they came out, I use them because I find them better or more convenient. In healthcare, I can't find a doctor or a healthcare administrator or a patient who says this is a perfect system. I can't imagine a system that would work better than than this one. Nobody says that, right? Because it's not true. It's it's so fundamentally broken and so you know 30% of the health care dollar is spent on administrative paperwork. So it's really the combination what makes me optimistic in healthcare and what makes patients optimistic. There was a Gallup survey last year that asked you know how are you feeling about AI? They were quite pessimistic about AI for politics for job replacement. The one area they're optimistic was healthcare. And I'm confident that that's because not only are the tools really spiffy, but the system is so broken that it's kind of it's not that hard to think of how it would make the lives of doctors and patients better. >> A agreed. Although when when you get into some of the examples, which I want to get into, you know, you talk about Scribe being a a great generator of of satisfaction amongst providers, but an unclear generator of true and and meaningful productivity gains. And so, is it a useful tool? Yes. But is it a life-changing tool? I mean maybe maybe for the provider and you know but but is it is it fundamentally changing the productivity equation in healthcare you know TBD? Um >> but I see scribe scribes are a single um I think the home runs are to come and the reason scribes are important is not so much for what they do but that they they have now infiltrated into the system and gotten buy in. >> But where I was going is you also make the point which I I thought was a a good point. Um and and I think it's unique in healthcare how how complex and interrelated these equations are. So you have a question of prior authorization. You know what's the right target end state? Is it tools and AI applications that automate and add intelligence to the prior authorization process or is it a fundamental revamping of the prior authorization process itself? And you gave an example where I think at a couple hospital systems the payers are linking directly into the EMR system. So fundamentally different has nothing to do with uh you know a third party software company that's built a great prior authorization application. has to do with linking payers directly with providers into the EMR. Lots of reasons you pointed out why that will be slow to adopt and challenging to adopt. But when you say it's it's all, you know, it's broken and and sort of the bar is low to to fix it. I think there are a number of reasons why we use this word broken. And the lack of control over all those variables, I think sometimes becomes a challenge to making progress. I can implement this great technology, but I'm still left with so many other variables that are making the prior authorization process challenging that I haven't yet fixed the the scratch the edge. I haven't fixed the problem. Do you think that's a concern and that we need, you know, a lot more systematic redesign than, you know, simply adding on a better technology or do you think the technology will take us at least 80% of the way to getting to a better outcome? >> No, I'm not I'm not sure it's going to take us 80% because I do think that would take fundamental redesign. you know, the kind of, you know, we still have have 15 20 million uninsured people. We have, you know, if a patient has a new diagnosis of cancer, the process of of navigating the system is incredibly unwieldy. You know, we try to make it better with care coordinators. But in some ways, that's what we had to do. We have to throw more humans at these incredibly complex systems to make them work. you know, there's no other industry like healthcare where you have this intermediary, the insurance company sitting kind of in the middle of you know your decision to use Amazon or or subscribe to Netflix or take a Whimo just between you and the company and do you think it's better and if it does if it is you use it in healthcare you have this sort of muddle of all these people you can easily imagine a system that would work better be less the fee for service payment structure is creates incentives to do more stuff and to focus on taking care of sick people as opposed to prevention. The problem is fixing all that is massive. I mean, what we tried to do with Obamacare was hard enough, just trying to get people insurance. The idea of fixing the entire system, I think, is going to be a bridge too far, at least in my lifetime. And so, you sort of have the system that that brats. How do you make it work better for clinicians? I think that gets us 50% of the way there in terms of better, safer, more accessible, less expensive care. Is it the entire fix? No. I guess I'm hopefulish that that if you fix some of that easy stuff, the harder stuff comes along, but the politics of that in terms of really goring the incumbents and therefore the backlash you would get and and and the complexity of it, I think is not a problem that AI is going to fix. A a thoughtful political system would have to be in place to fix that. And I don't know of any in this country. You mentioned uh IBM's Watson Health as as an example of an early player that tried in AI and healthcare and and ultimately didn't succeed. What was it that they did that prevented them from succeeding? Were they just too early? Was the technology not there? Was the market not there? Were there other considerations? Well, they they they focused on marketing before product, and that was obviously a mistake because in healthcare, you know, you don't have to screw very much up to kill somebody or to have sort of an iconic example of of how bad this thing is. And so Watson came out of the blocks after the Jeopardy victory where everybody said, "Wow, my god, this is thing so cool." And immediately started doing chess thumping and there was a lot of articles about Dr. Watson and and you know, just set super high expectations that they could never meet. They also kind of never really decided what their use cases were going to be. If you looked at there was a Watson tool for everything and none of them were very good. None of them were really ready for prime time and at the end of the day it was probably too early. I think the fundamental, you know, I call my book the giant leap partly because until we had generative AI, all of the information about you, huge amount of it is in narrative form and non-computable form until there was an AI that could actually read a note and then produce produce output in human-like form that didn't exist in Watson's day. And so both premature but also overreaching and not having the use cases and the evidence that it actually was useful. I'm curious to get your thoughts on on building and commercializing these products. Uh, you know, I think an area that gets maybe overlooked sometimes is the amount of training that goes into perfecting these tools. And again, healthcare is complicated. So many different SKs. You know, each payer has their own policy. Each patient has its own unique history. Hospitals and health systems are an amalgamation of many different specialties. Each specialty has its own realities. How realistic is it that we're going to get to fully trained, productized, highly scalable tools as you move beyond scribing into some of those more advanced use cases trying to optimize around the billing rules that may change because the clinical practice has changed when COVID hit the sort of a new disease you have to integrate into it. So, it strikes me as a pretty good kicking the tires about can we get this right. What I think will always be true in healthcare is there's some area of there there's some part of the implementation that will determine success. So you can build a pretty spiffy tool based on a data set that came from one patient population and then you try to implement it in another and it may not work the same way. The patients are different in some fundamental ways. So the importance of local validation and maybe local retraining I think is going to be higher in healthcare than in most other industries where you know I'm sure Netflix has understands that viewer habits in Iowa are different than viewer habits in San Francisco. you know the fundamental nature of what they're doing may not change that much probably true for Amazon healthcare you know does have some local elements to it but you know by and large diagnosis treatment recommendations are largely determined not yeah I mean there's certain bacteria that you can get if you're in New Orleans and not get in San Francisco but by and large medicine's the same standards the same the drugs are the same so I don't think that's insurmountable >> is that local customization uh albeit it's it's not maybe the first 80% it's the last 20 does that change who you think is positioned to win in some of these solutions. So, for example, an EMR provider may be good at deploying broadly replicable technology, but not necessarily as equipped, and I'm I'm making this up, you may disagree, but not necessarily as good as in that last mile component of customization to end clients or not necessarily. >> No, I think it's a good point. think that anybody oper I think that's a tension between operating at scale and understanding kind of local circumstances which may be partly due to the data differences and the patient populations different but probably more likely to do with the way work is done in a given organization and I think the tension there is if you you know and I see this from some of the third party vendors that are trying to make the case that you should buy my tool because we will come in up to the elbows in your organization and watch the way your doctors and your nurses do their work and partner with you as we tweak the tools so it really fits you and your workflow. Something there's no way Epic and certainly no way Google or Microsoft can do. On the other hand, Google and Microsoft and Epic are going to be in business in 5 years. There may be advantages to having a tool that's been tested in a hundred different organizations rather than just yours. And so I worry a little bit about that because I I would think that on average a tool built by a third-party VC funded vendor whose business is about this use case or these use cases is on average going to be better than a tool built by as one of a hundred tools that the EHR vendor is going to build or even worse one of a thousand tools that Google is going to build because they're doing it across every industry. But the advantage that Epic has is really profound. I mean it and I can tell you that my institution which is a high-erforming 15 billion dollar a year you know top 10 academic enterprise says where Epic first meaning that if Epics's built it the a third party tool would have to be a lot lot better and a lot lot cheaper for us to go with it because the ease of just turning a switch on with Epic and knowing it's going to be integrated has some major advantages. I worry about that because I think the market will be better and more vibrant if some of these third party tools succeed. >> Yeah. So it's a it's a another sort of recurring theme of these tensions in healthcare which you know you may have better technology but fall for sort of a slower adoption of the best because of these forces of conservatism uh and these for forces of of integration where we're >> conservatism and yeah and risk aversion. We're all worried about something awful happening and that's a newspaper article and that's a malpractice suit and or a privacy thing. you know, you're pretty confident that Epic's going to keep your data private. You know, a third party startup that's only been around for a year, you're a little less confident. All those things sort of push us to anything close to equal going with the tried andrue tends to win, which I think is in some ways unfortunate because it would probably slow down the level of innovation. >> Yeah. Um, makes sense. So, let's maybe segue into some some examples or use cases. And I'm curious to get your scorecard, I'll say, of these use cases from a perspective of where are we enrolling them out. So adoption uh and then effectiveness from a clinical care perspective, from a stakeholder experience perspective and from a financial ROI perspective. Uh so the first one you mentioned and we we've covered in some form, but I'm curious to get your thoughts again. Scribe. >> Yeah, I mean scribes are amazing in that two years ago nobody had an AI scribe. Today almost every big system has them and it's almost become a price of admission. It's almost been like if you don't have them you're not going to be able to hire a new doctor. they're going to say where are your scribes and so that's kind of the most amazing thing about scribes that it at now from the corporate standpoint the prices have plummeted in part because of the competition I feel badly for the companies because in some ways it went from this like I can't believe this thing works to now total commoditization but I think it just proved the case that AI can work in healthcare proi is tough as I said and you said doesn't save us that much time probably because I'm taking I'm now actually looking you in the eye and having you having a human-toument conversation which takes a little longer than me paying no attention to what you're saying and pecking away on my computer. I'd still think that's net good. The ROI probably is in happier doctors, happier patients, recruitment and retention of doctors, which turned out to be pretty expensive. But but in terms of like really demonstrating it's flowing at the bottom line, tricky to do and um that's a worry. And if it does save me a minute or two, the other question that comes up is what happens with that minute or two? Right now, if I'm using it for a more human conversation with a patient, that's the way I want to use it. My system may say, "You should be able to see another patient in a half a day, and I'm going to make the hamster wheel go faster." So, their attentions marble through it. >> So, high on adoption, high on stakeholder experience, more questionable on tangible ROI. >> I think that's fair. >> Prior authorization, >> lots lots of adoption, lots of happiness on the part of the providers for whom this is a just complete scourge of of life. ROI places that are are measuring it are seeing sort of better and faster uh approvals. The problem of course is the insurance companies are part of this. They're not falling asleep. They have their own AI to reject your AI develop prior off. So we'll have to see. Uh as I wrote in the book, those those couple of cases still are pretty singular, but Epic has developed a payer provider portal. And I think it's real. I think both sides of this equation, the the clinicians and the healthcare organizations and the insurance companies are going to recognize that if they can dial down the friction in this system, it's good for everybody. I think the insurance companies recognize this. They may be sitting there saying the friction is feature, not bug. Part of what we want to do is make it really hard for you to get this $100,000 amunotherapy or this $10,000 PET scan. And uh so we'll see. I don't know how they feel about it right now. Yeah, I was going to ask that next question, but you sort of have have answered it about sort of vested interests that might slow down the process of adoption where not everybody is focused on collaboration. Um, but you you've gotten to that. So, next use case, email response, which I thought was interesting because you covered that in your book and I don't hear that every day, but it it certainly seems relevant. So, would love to get your thoughts on on what you had in mind email response. >> Now, it's now the biggest complaint the docs have about their electronic health record and health systems have woken up to it. like you can't have the doctor be doing two hours of work after putting the kids to sleep every night answering emails. And part of the problem is the email is a straight has been a straight shot to the doctor. So some of the questions that come are like I have no idea like what your insurance company covers or or not. In the old days they would have gone to your staff to deal with. So I think it's going to help companies you know healthcare organizations are beginning to turn on tools. It's a harder problem than the scribe because it's it could be a hundred different use cases in one. The email inbox is just a portal for anything the patient wants to ask. It might be a clinical question. It might be insurance question. So I think it's going to help and the early experience though is not that great. The drafts are, you know, sometimes useful but not good enough that the doctor doesn't have to sit there and edit the thing and then by the time you do that sometimes they feel like they might as well have done it themselves. >> We'll do we'll do one or two more. Clinical decision-m so diagnosis, decision support. I mean that's the holy grail that that is I I'd say you know when I say scribes or even chart summarization are a single the home run is you have transformed the way diagnoses are made and the way tests are ordered and and thought of and treatments are prescribed and that's I think where that's where the real money will be because that's where the real money is spent in healthcare and where some of the quality problems arise really early not very far along the early experiences for example with sepsis decision support which is the easiest use case were awful about 100 false alarms for every true case that it found. But tools are getting better fast. Ultimately, right now, when I'm on rounds, I pull out my phone and I I dictate the case to open evidence to get it to give me decision support. In the future, that'll just be integrated into the electronic health record. And so, it will automatically suggest a diagnosis or the appropriate next steps based on what it already knows about the case rather than me having to dictate it. So, I think it's going to get I think it's the next frontier. things can get better faster. A lot of companies are working on this. Epic is working on this. And I think it's going to be the thing that's most transformative in all of this. >> And what are some of the necessary conditions for that to be successful? Do we need concepts like data interoperability to be solved for? Or is this still within the realm of a technology solution getting better, smarter, more trained? >> It's better if it knows all of your history, including history that was gleaned from you being at different healthcare organizations. That's getting better, but still not perfect. Sometimes they're in they're they're in non-shared systems because the stakes are high and an error can be consequential. It's got to be really good. And so it can't be like sepsis where it gives you so many false alarms that the doctors eventually turn it off and are it drives everybody crazy. It's got to there's some fundamental questions about decision support that haven't yet been answered both technically and some ways from a process standpoint. Does it give me is it suggesting diagnosis in real time? Is it suggesting diagnosis to me first or does it ask me to suggest my diagnosis and then it weighs in on that? If it's alerts, you know, for something that might be dangerous, is it pinging me in real time which is going to drive me crazy if there's a lot of false alarm or does it put it in a place and signal me every four hours to take a look? There's a lot of design decisions that I think we haven't really worked through. And many ways the most important one there, I have a patient with Alzheimer's. is a new medicine that costs 40,000 bucks, slows the progression of disease down by two or three months, and has a 1% chance causing the patient to bleed into their brain. Does it recommend it or not? That's a really complicated decision that has to do with values and ethics and maybe conflicts of interest and how the hospitals paid and has the insurance company or the or the pharma company given us some money to make sure their drug comes up. All of that's going to have to be worked out and there's going to be have to be some regulation there about the way that all plays out. So the more prescriptive it gets about consequential decisions of your treatment, there are a lot of really hard questions that arise that we haven't even begun to grapple with yet. >> And last one, radiology. And the reason why I wanted to pick radiology is it's it's an area where AI is used and and you make the point um despite its utilization still you know jobs wanted signs uh >> we can't find enough radiologists and here in San Francisco which as you saw Jeff Hen the founder and father of gender of AI in 19 in 2016 said we should stop training radiologists now it's obvious in five years we won't need anymore and obviously he was massively massively rocks. It's slow for a lot of different reasons. It turns out to be a harder problem than a driverless car, which I would not have expected. The complexity of the human body, the number of normal variations, the fact that you really need to understand the patients history in order to interpret the image, which until generative AI it could not do, now it can. Maybe a little bit of the guild and and radiologists welcoming it if it helps them do their job, but being a little scared of it taking their job. I think all of those are at play, but you're beginning to see it infiltrate in kind of doing initial readings and triage of certain tests, doing an initial reading of a mammogram or a screening cat scan for lung cancer and being quite accurate. If it says it's normal, it's normal. You can be confident on the malpractice system is going to insist that a doctor sign the final reading for a while. We'll see forever. I don't Does that give you pause on some of the optimism for successful roll out in in the clinical arena? I mean, here's an area where it intuitively seems like it would be easier, but it's it's more difficult than, you know, driverless car and the the adoption has been slow. >> I think it actually gives me hope because I think in some ways the biggest risks here are political that that if it really looked like it was going to take my job, I would figure out a way of making you scared about it. M >> and I would not say that I'm that don't do it because it's going to take my job. I I would say it's going to it could kill you. And so the fact that that job replacement among the key constit the the key incumbents who are doctors and nurses I think is going to be pretty slow actually I think is a pathway toward it ultimately succeeding in healthcare because we're less likely to push back against it. >> You focused a lot and maybe this is a good place for us to wrap up. We focused a lot on the unintended consequences of the EMR rollout and a lot more administrative work than you had the patient portal and so a lot more emails and you know expectations of 24/7 communication unintended consequences are always hard to predict uh >> definitionally right >> but if you had to give us some areas with with these AI solutions of what some of the unintended consequences are that we should keep on our radar do you have any predictions of what those might be? Yeah, I mean I think that as I was researching and writing the book, the thing that that came up over and over again is the AI, whatever use case you've mentioned, I mean, scribes, chart summarization, decision support, whatever, has already reached a stage where it's good enough to be useful and yet not good enough to trust independently. And so you're going to have this very funky diad of the quote doctor in the loop, the the being the final arbiter of of an AI recommendation. and lot of there's a lot of mischief that can happen there. First of all, we stink at that. Humans are not good at staying alert when they have a generally trusted technology. B, we will deskill eventually. We're just not that good at the thing that we used to be quite good at. C, you're already seeing studies showing that periodically the human in the loop screws things up. The AI by itself is better than the human AI diad. So there's there's there's a lot of complexity in the way and yet we will insist on the human loop until it's perfect in part because the malpractice system will dictate that and you know the newspapers will dictate that. lot of complexity there that I don't think we've really thought our way through and I I think there's going to be a lot of uh a lot of unanticipated >> consequences and D I would just add to the list you know a big reason why people are starting out with these technologies is to either increase supply or reduce cost which is sort of one and the same and if it if it stays at that point you know arguably you you haven't done either necessarily or you've done >> yeah I mean the happy talk we engage in is that nobody's going to lose their job but the number of the increase in employment that we've had over the last 20 years will be flatter, which is sort of happy talk to pacify the incumbents, but I think probably right for the foreseeable future that the economic advantages here are going to be sort of more productive people and less need to hire an additional 100 people in the billing department or the care coordination department. I I think some to some extent that's that's happy talk and a little BS and some extent it's probably right. I think that that I could eas I could see that happening. Other unanticipated consequences, patients using these tools by themselves >> and us believing that because when I use GPT or Gemini or open evidence, I love it and it's helping me and and really underestimating the degree to which I as an expert can put in the right prompts and get the right information out and and look at something and say that's right and look at something else and say that's ridiculous. I'm not going to follow that. A patient can't do that. You know, non-experts using these systems that are imperfect. I think they're, you know, I think they're net good. I'm glad they are. I think if they come to the office and they've already GPT their symptoms, it's probably o okay, but I think there's going to be some problems there and some mischief there as patients get information back that sometimes going to be dead wrong and patients have no good way of of figuring that out. I think that's one I'm I'm going to be watching very carefully. Bob, I really want to thank you for a very insightful conversation and wish you the best of luck on your your upcoming release. Again, it was uh the name of the book is A Giant Leap. How is AI transforming healthcare and what it means for our future? Coming out on February 3rd. Look forward to getting a chance to read the full book. >> Thank you, Justin. I really appreciate it. >> Thank you. >> Thank you for joining us on Analyzing Healthcare. Stay informed and stay inspired. Don't forget to subscribe and visit scale- community.com to become a scale community member. Until next time, keep exploring the ideas that shape our healthcare systems.