Title: The AI tool physicians actually love — Robert Wachter, M.D., chair of UCSF Medicine
Channel: Medical Economics TV
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_cDC3b8cVAs
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

Uh Dr. Wter, thank you so much for joining me today. >> It's a great pleasure to be with you. Thanks. >> So, I guess we'll just uh kind of jump into it about like the benefit of of these AI scribes. I know you've written about um how EHR has created pajama time. Are ambient AI scribes able to realistically reverse that trend or are we kind of overstating their ability? reverse is a little strong because the the uh the genesis of pajama time I think originally was documentation of the visit itself and now has also morphed into answering 100 emails from patients and so scribes doesn't address that hopefully other AI will uh so it doesn't completely solve the problem of pajama time but I think it it's the first technology we've seen that says to physicians uh we can give you back some of not only your time but of the humanity of the doctor patient visit. Um, we can create a mechanism by which you can make eye contact with your patients and and both appear and also be paying real attention to them as opposed to being a pretty expensive grumpy data entry clerk. So, in that way, it does save some time, but I think it's more more important in in kind of resurrecting the humanity of the doctor patient visit. >> Yeah. And I guess just to follow up on that, I mean what is making these these tools or what about these tools is is really changing patient workflows or or physician workflows rather. I mean is it those that time saved and documentation or is it more about that um that connection with patients and you know the ability to have eye contact? >> Yeah, a little bit of both. But I I think the main thing it is doing I mean if you think about it what what happened was when we were on paper I'd scribble down whatever I would scribble down in my notes sometime in real time but I could kind of make eye contact with the patient while I was doing that sometime afterwards. And uh what the electronic health record did was enable a whole bunch of new requirements of what needed to be in the note because all of a sudden there was a mechanism by which my boss, Medicare, United Healthcare, my malpractice lawyer, uh the quality measures, all sorts of entities could be looking over my metaphorical shoulder and make me do stuff that they couldn't make me do before. So and of course given that opportunity, they took advantage of that. So all of a sudden the note became bloated. It became full of checkboxes and became sort of disheartening. Not only because it drove the physician sort of away from what he or she thought they were supposed to be doing, which is listening to this other human talk about their issues, but also um a little bit of in some ways both a time sync and a cognitive sync. And that you know you're spending so much of your energy inputting stuff that you're not really fully there, fully present and listening for the patient. What it did was relieve you to a large extent of that documentation burden and it was very important that it it it did it did some magic. I mean it was it was not simply uh a voicetoext translator which we've had for you know a dozen years. If that's all it did and it produced a transcript of my conversation with a patient would be entirely worthless. it. The real magic and where generative AI came in was that it could take this conversation and to some extent figure out what should be in and what should be out of the note. You know, in your description of your chest pain and your headache out, how wonderful it was playing with your grandchildren last weekend or how well Johnny did in the soccer game. Uh but also uh pull things together in a in a a formula that is very important for the documentation of a note. So, if I start out saying I've had chest pain and then I tell you a little bit about, you know, my uh my fkacia recipe and get down to talking about my shortness of breath five minutes later, those two things go together in the note. So, the AI had to be smart enough to do that. So, the tools, you know, really very quickly, two or three years ago, the tools all of a sudden started being rolled out that were smart enough to do that. And doctors said, "This solves a really important problem. I can now both make eye contact with my patient, be engaged and not spend this enormous amount of time documenting. Uh where I think we probably overhyped it or maybe overestimated what its impact would be was we would thought we thought it would save five minutes a visit or 10 minutes of visit. Uh it turns out not it doesn't save that much time. saves a little bit, but part of the reason is the repurposing of the time, meaning that it probably does save me a decent amount of time typing and documenting. And some of that time is repurposed into actual genuine human contact, which feels better for the doctor and feels better for the patient. And I think, although it's hard to prove, I think is ultimately better for health care in that it's more likely I'm going to be really tuned into what's going on with you and ask the right questions and probe the right issues. Another thing I know like you use the language training wheels for for AI documentation. Could you kind of explain that idea like why is AI and documentation the right entry point there and what makes scribes kind of lower risk I guess than AI in other areas? >> Yeah, I'll tell you a quick story which is that you know I write in my book that that AI and healthcare is not new. AI and healthcare was like a really hot issue in the late 70s and early 80s believe it or not. Uh now it wasn't ready for prime time for a lot of reasons. you know, all of our documentation was on paper. So if you wanted to use a computer to do AI, you had to re-enter all the data into the computer. Uh there was no such thing as a cloud. And so there were a lot of reasons it was not ready for prime time. And also the technology of AI at the time was the kind of early years of AI was all if then statements. And if then works fine for, you know, if the patient has a sore throat and swollen lymph nodes, they probably have strep throat or mono. uh it falls apart very quickly when patients actually have the problems that real patients have, which is five things going on and three different diagnoses and they're on nine medicines. And so in some ways it wasn't quite ready for prime time. But in some ways the biggest problem that the early founding fathers and they were almost all guys had was they decided as they had to pick a you know across the universe of possible use cases they decided to focus on diagnosis. And I interviewed a bunch of them for my last book uh the digital doctor and asked like why did you do this? And they said we weren't naive about how complicated it was or how hard it would be to get it right. We just thought it was the most interesting problem. These are very smart folks who often had MDs and PhDs in computer science. And so uh very it very quickly flamed out and it flamed out in part because of the flaws I've already mentioned that you know re-entering the data and and this if then then structure wasn't very robust but also flamed out because you don't start on the hardest problem uh because particularly one where if you get it wrong you can kill somebody. uh that is not a good strategy to win over hearts and minds of the incumbents in this case the doctors uh to gain trust uh because at some point something will go really wrong and you'll hurt somebody or kill somebody and so this time and and the analogy you know I live in San Francisco so we tend to think a lot about driverless cars like how did that happen because it's a miracle and it it didn't start with a driverless car it started with cruise control it started with and then added Okay, you know, can you apply the brakes automatically if it if I'm going too fast and catching up too quickly to the car in front of me? And can you signal me when my head seems to be bobbing and I might be falling asleep or I'm going into a lane where there's a car and then eventually you you with a lot of testing and trial and error, you get to autonomous uh vehicles. So you you you do not start with the hardest problem, you start with easier, more tractable problems. You gain experience and you gain trust. So this time around as the AI got much better some of the fundamental problems from the 1980s have been solved. The data are all digital uh we have cloud storage uh which provides you know much more access to data. We have new AI that really is no longer a bunch of if then statements but can actually deal with the complexity of real medicine and understand unstructured data. But in addition, I would say if we started with diagnosis being the first use case, that would have been a big problem, because as good as it is, and I use AI for diagnosis help all the time, it sometimes gets it wrong. It sometimes hallucinates. And when it does, if I'm particularly if I'm either not very good at my job or asleep at the switch, I can say this patient has a the wrong diagnosis and label them with that and maybe treat them for the wrong thing and and probably hurt them. And if that were to happen very quickly, you'd lose support of this technology. So people sometimes talk about a you know 2x two quadr a 2 x two uh matrix and it's sort of feasibility or you know ease of getting the thing right and on the other on the other axis is sort of the consequences of if you get it right or get it wrong. Diagnosis is both hard to do hard to get right and if you get it wrong you can kill somebody. So I think this time around we're being sort of smarter and more thoughtful and that is to begin in the quadrant of relatively easy things to do that if you get wrong probably you're not going to kill anybody and it turned out that AI scribes were that and uh there was already a model for this in places like UCSF where I work we had scribes so 10 years ago we began hiring mostly premedical students to come into the office and type while I might be talking to the patient. So there was a model for a non-expert, the non-f physician to take in this data, understand it, have some general rules and put it on charts. So we sort of knew how to do that. Um the tools were very good, but at the end of the day, getting absolutely everything right in a note, it's not it's not inconsequential if there's an error, but it's pretty unlikely you're going to kill somebody if you if you have an error. So it turned out to be just the right quadrant in that 2x two table. Something that the the technology was good enough to do was was good enough to do well. Uh and solved a really important problem. Physicians have been complaining about eye contact and data entry stuff and pajama time for the last 10 or 15 years basically since EHRs. And so the combination of being a real live use case that physicians saw as being useful and patients did as well. as patients noticed that the doctors were looking at them appeared to be appeared to be listening. Uh solved it not perfectly but but but well enough um was not going to be autonomous meaning that it's going to draft a note and I now have an opportunity to review it and at least one hopes catch an error if it exists and even if there is an error uh it's not not the end of the world and then from a health system perspective because the health systems were probably going to be the ones buying it. It also the health system might say if I can have happier doctors, happier patients, and maybe save a few minutes per visit, economically, it's probably going to come close to paying for itself, maybe even better than that. And certainly, when you factor in the cost of recruiting a new physician, which for primary care docs is often estimated in the a million dollars range, uh, if this makes my doc significantly happier and helps me recruit and retain doctors, there's probably an economic ROI to do it. So all of the ducks lined up for this being the first use case. I think investors saw that and invested in a number of companies. The companies that built the tools were pretty good. Um and you know and what you had was I think a formula for su success and I think it's worked out pretty well. I think for a place like UCSF all of our three or 4 thousand doctors now have access to an AI scribe. About 70% of them use it. The about 90% of them say I love it. and and and we've almost gotten to the point where if we turned it off, we might lose a fair number of doctors or it would be hard to recruit a doctor if we didn't offer them an AI scribe. It's almost become sort of an expectation of practice now. >> So, I do kind of want to jump ahead to any potential like drawbacks. I know you said if it makes a mistake, obviously, it's not, you know, the end of the world if it gets one thing wrong in there, but what are kind of those uh any complications that physicians are seeing? >> Yeah, I mean, it it's it is not perfect. I think there are the tools are getting better, but ultimately what you'd like is a tool that's very, you know, that documents quite differently for a cardiologist versus a primary care doc. And right now they do a little bit of that, but but not perfectly. That I think will get better over time as they get more data and do more reps. Um, if it does make a mistake, again, not the end of the world, but not nothing, you'd like the physician to be reviewing the note. And as I spend a fair amount of time in my book talk about you know this human in the loop idea sounds better on paper than it is in reality. Meaning that if you know I've used the scribe and the last 49 notes that it created for me I reviewed in detail and they were perfect. Am I really going to be fully attentive as I review note number 15? If I'm human the answer is no. At some point I'll begin overrusting the data. We're not that worried in this one about deskkilling. that'll come up in other things like diagnosis. I mean, it's it's hard for me to imagine that I'm going to deskkill my ability to read over a note and say whether it's accurate or not. That that that doesn't feel salient. It comes up a lot for other things. Um maybe the biggest downside I guess one downside is I think it it maybe has underdelivered a little bit in terms of the efficiency advantages. I think, you know, people were counting uh, you know, when when you looked at the the ROI calculations early on. If I was a health system and it was going to cost me three million bucks to bring in an AI scribe, I sort of said, well, if it saves five minutes a visit, I can, you know, that's one or two extra patients a day and the math works out. And I think in the early study so far, there has been some time savings, not quite as much as people would have anticipated. I think probably the biggest potential downside is sort of a question of how you and how I how I think which is is a little bit of a trade-off. You know, on the one hand, I think uh I like the idea that I'm now listening really intently to the patient while the patient's speaking and I'm making eye contact and the patient can tell I'm engaged and paying attention to them, not my computer. That that is a great thing. On the other hand, when I in the old days would would be typing my note, that was a cognitively active uh process. And sometime while I was typing my note, I would say, "Damn, I forgot to ask whether she has a pet at home or whether she's recently, you know, traveled and drank fresh water from a lake or whatever it was." Um there there's something in the process of the human thinking about something and writing it that is probably more cognit cognitively active than the human reading over a draft of something. And I think this comes up all it's marveled through education. probably marbled through your world as a journalist, too, that if the thing's drafting something for you, is there something lost because you didn't go through the incredible hardship of doing the first draft? And, you know, these are trade-offs. I think, you know, people are voting with their the doctors are voting with their feet and saying, "We're willing to make that trade-off." And we think the advantage of being less cognitively exhausted by listening to the patient and being more engaged probably has net advantages over the advantage of me typing, you know, an entire note. But I I'd say that's probably to me the biggest biggest trade-off. And I this point a little hard to quantify. I haven't seen a really good study that kind of gets at this instinct I have that there's a little bit lost when I'm not typing my own note. >> That makes sense. Um then I kind of wanted to go back to I know you mentioned um at San Francisco I think it was 70% of the docs are now using their AI scribe. Do you have any insight into the 30% that aren't? Is that just kind of they're setting their ways they don't want to switch or >> probably a little bit of everything. A little bit of of you know what I'm doing now works fine. It's not like it's not like this is you know if I don't use it I can't practice or practice effectively and I've been doing this thing this way for for 20 years. technology is not very complex but not nothing. You've got to learn a little bit about how to use it um and get it to you get your note which is recorded on your phone then to sync up with Epic and all of that. It's it's not massive amounts of training and change management but it's not zero. Um there are there's some people people who find that uh that that that actually what I was saying before that the process of me typing and writing the note actually is valuable to my thought process and don't want to completely give that up. But I think for a lot of people it it and it little it depends to some extent on what your work is like. Like if you are in primary care you your history taking is prolonged um uh you know you're taking in a whole lot of data. It might be more useful than if you're in a highly specialized area where you only have a series of set questions and they actually are pretty checkboxy. You're asking them, you know, for patients who come in with new shoulder pain. And if you're an orthopedics clinic, you're not asking about the universe of symptoms they have. And it may be that the the time value of of of sort of moving away from checkboxes or or documenting yourself isn't that high. I think for some people they tried it and and found that it did make some errors every now and then and therefore they felt like I can't trust it. For some people the physical exam is a particularly important part of their process and it's not great with the physical it doesn't really you can't do the physical exam. you have to basically narrate your physical exam, which is a little bit weird. You've never had to do that before. So, that really is a change in process. I think it's kind of a >> it's a whole bunch of of of of issues. I I wouldn't say all all 30% are lit stuck in their ways and all that. I think, you know, a fair number of them have tried it and just found the advantages are not that great compared to, you know, the the status quo. Uh and that's fine and we're you know we're not certainly not mandating that people uh that people use it. Some people have found that patients are a little bit off-put in when they see you know we're we're supposed to ask for consent for the patient and some p patients are tiny bit creep creeped out by it. Um so I think there's a whole variety of reasons but you know it did the technology didn't exist three years ago. uh you know there aren't many technologies in healthcare that within 3 years it's an entirely elective technology you don't have to use it and it has a 70% adoption rate that's you know that's pretty good for us >> yeah definitely um I know we kind of talked about uh over reliance there and how you know obviously you're not going to forget how to how to proofread um but >> I hope yeah I mean not you're not going to forget how to proofread you may you may stop proofreading very very sure thoughtfully as you get as you have come to, you know, I mean, it's a general human tendency that when you come to rely on a technology, you're going to trust the technology and probably be a little bit asleep at the switch. >> Yeah. Do you see that as as kind of a real risk? And is there ways that maybe health systems can put in place, you have to have either someone set to do that as, you know, double check things or or some other kind of solution? >> You know, we're thinking about it. I was talking to a senior leader at one of the very big tech companies today and he he said you know we are actually beginning to develop tools for example for medical education that are different you know for example it may be that the that the student has access to a scribe uh but um uh you know there's something embedded in the actual process that makes them do more makes them you know it's that there's something that's actually testing to see that you reviewed it carefully. Maybe it's somehow looking at your eye movements or it's, you know, making sure that you Now, will we do what TSA does, which is throw an image of a bomb or or a gun into the video feed periodically to make sure you're awake? Probably not a terrible idea. You'd have to be 1,000% sure that if you build in a an intentional mistake that it can't possibly reach the patient. But, you know, as a if you think about fish testing and you know, you're probably in your email system you get a fake email periodically to make sure you're awake and you catch it. Um, I I do think we what we shouldn't do is just say here's I think one of the fundamental challenges in AI meets healthcare. Maybe AI meets everything. You know, the tools are they're now good enough and here's one of them describe good enough to be useful, not perfect. So, I think it's going to be important for us to really be strategic about, okay, so the system we're going to have is this AI human diad and the human in the loop and then to just say, all right, I'm done. I've got a perfect system. That's just going to be wrong. And and so to really be quite intentional about what does the training look like to be sure people understand that the tools are not perfect, what does the system look like? Maybe the system signals you with it's green, you know, at the top of the page when it's sure it got 100% right and it's yellow when there was a word it didn't quite understand or there's some internal conflict in the note. And so you're you see that signal and you know I got to review this yellow note more carefully. Maybe it is the fake image of the maybe it throws in an error periodically to make sure you're you're you're awake. Hard to know. I don't think anybody's really tested these out yet. But I think the key concept here is the AI human diad sounds safer than it is. >> It certainly is not a failsafe system and we've got to be quite intentional about how to make that >> that right. you know, then we get to the new set of problems, maybe not as relevant for scribing as other things, but you know, the the study that came out a year or so ago that looked at diagnostic reasoning and said humans did, you know, 65%, humans with AI did like 68%, but the AI by itself was 90%. Meaning that the human in the loop actually screwed things up. So, we will begin seeing times where the human intervention actually degrades the performance. that recent study in nature medicine that looked at patient uses of of patientf facing diagnostic tools where the patients kind of muck things up by putting in the wrong prompts and all that. So not only is the human human in the loop an imperfect system, there may be times where it actually degrades the performance. That's probably less true. It's sort of hard for me to imagine that in me reviewing my own note that was just created two minutes ago, I'm going to look at something and the AI said and and correct it when when the AI was right and I was wrong. Doesn't seem completely relevant to that use case, but I think it's just it's just emblematic of it just, you know, human in the loop just sounds really good and when you actually probe like how's this going to work in real life, it's a pretty imperfect system. >> Sure. We kind of we touched on ROI and obviously the cost of recruiting >> new we have a new paper on ROI by the way that just came out a couple of days ago in uh in JAMAMA internal medicine lead author is Lisa Rodenstein and it we sort of spend a fair amount of time just how how should you even think about ROI in the context of tools like scribes. >> Great. I mean is it is it more is it a financial kind of ROI or is it more on that retention and and physician morale? Yeah, I I it I think the answer today is you'd have to say it's more on the retention uh physician experience sort of joy in practice and to maybe to a little bit of extent patient experience as well. Uh all of which I think do have quantifiable ROI again when you factor in the cost of recruiting and retaining and replacing a physician and probably the cost of retaining a patient who too. I mean, we certainly've had patients say, "I don't want to come here. It looks like the doctor's not paying attention to me." Uh, but I I I think the if you just did the math on, you know, x amount of minutes saved translated into, you know, more patients coming through. Uh, first of all, I think there's a problem there too, which is if I save five minutes, do I repurpose that into five minutes of the hamster wheel spinning that much faster? If part of my motivation was to have a happier doctor and patient, probably you shouldn't. You might say half of it goes to that uh and I because I'm trying to defay my investment and I want more patients to be seen, but half of it is is kept by the p by the doctor and the patient. Uh but that becomes a tricky management question. But I'd say today you would say that there's a there's a little we had another paper uh at UCSF came out maybe a month or two ago. Um I think the lead author is AJ Holgrren looking at the time saving and and ROI specifically uh that that basically said it comes out to be about neutral that the you do save a little bit of time if you do the math on that amount of time over a course of a year sort of pays for the AI scribe. So I think the answer is the AI scribe probably kind of pays for itself just in pure throughput and time savings but the real benefit is the joy in practice recruitment retention and maybe ultimately uh open winning over hearts and minds and opening the door for more and other AI tools. I think in the this is going to be super hard to quantify, but at the end of the day, creating an organization that welcomes the next AI tool because they think it will help them do their work and do patient care better as a counterforce to some real, you know, what is this thing and can I trust it and and is it ultimately going to take my job? So, you know, some forces that would have you reject it. I think in some ways the biggest contribution of AI scribes probably will be winning over hearts and minds and creating receptivity for the next probably more complex uh but maybe more even more important AI tools as I wrote in the book you know an AI scribe or an AI chart review uh tool these are these are singles I mean the home run here is going to be really robust clinical decision support that helps not only make diagnoses but helps suggest the right tests suggest the right treatment That's where the clinical money is. That's where the money money is. That's where the clinical benefit uh really is. And again, you didn't want to start with that because the stakes are too high. But I think the biggest benefit of scribes when the when when that story is finally written will be creating winning hearts and minds and creating receptivity for bigger, broader, and ultimately more impactful tools. Sure. >> Is there anything we didn't talk about? I know I wanted to get to I wanted to get to a giant leap and kind of, you know, the shift to Genai. Obviously, we talked about it throughout. >> I mean, that the overall theme of the book is I came out of it pretty optimistic for its role in healthcare. And in part because I think this is an example of a tool that really does solve a real problem and the users are happy. As one person told me, this is the first tool I've ever seen in it where people like run to the chief information officer's office and say, I really want this. You know, we haven't had that before. Usually, it's I'm running to the CIO's office saying, well, why did you bring this in and it's awful and couldn't we have found something better? So I think and the reason I'm optimistic a I think the tools have really remarkable capabilities. I mean three years ago the idea that you could replace a human scribe with an AI scribe would have been inconceivable. And you know I feel some sorry for the companies in a way because you know they built these unbelievable tools and they're breathtakingly good and within two years they became commoditized and prices are falling and now Epic's going to do it themselves and it's a pretty tough market. uh but the tools are really kind of remarkable in solving important problems. And then the other point I've made is why I'm optimistic in healthcare is the system is so broken that we need tools like this in order for just to get through our day for us to do our jobs. And you know as I as I've said many times you know the day GPT came out it wasn't like I was on Google saying I need a better search engine. You know I couldn't even imagine a better search engine but I certainly don't know anybody who said the healthare system is perfect and we don't need help. And so it's really the in some ways the theme of the book is that it I am quite optimistic. It's not going to be easy. It's not going to be perfect. There'll be plenty of speed bumps, but because the tools really do amazing things, solve important problems, and the system is in desperate need of transformation. >> Great. Dr. Walker, thank you so much for your time today. >> My pleasure.