Title: Healthcare Beat Silicon Valley at AI: The $1.4B Data Breakdown
Channel: IDAAHub
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a0N_lqlwx7A
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

two years, healthcare went from 3% adoption to becoming America's AI powerhouse. What if I told you that healthcare is leading in AI adoption compared to every other industry? Would you believe it? Welcome to IDAB podcast. Um AI in finance and healthcare. Today we're going to talk about AI in healthcare. I'm your your host Deep. There's a report that came out by Menllo Ventures which I'm really excited to share with everyone. Uh I I remember in the '9s when every other industry was adopting or going going through a digital transformation, healthcare was struggling. It was working with faxes then. um and and also it took a while for healthcare industry to adopt um electronic medical records but when when it comes to AI somehow it's a leader and it has surpassed every other industry we we see out there. So let it let me take you through this um Cobre report from Menlo Ventures and let's do a deep dive. How is healthcare leading now with AI? So the state of AI in healthcare by Menllo Ventures is a very interesting report. The what it says is healthcare is setting the pace for enterprise AI adoption now and the transformation happened really fast in just 2 years. Healthcare went from 3% adoption to becoming America's AI powerhouse. So according to this report research 22% of the healthcare organizations have implemented domain specific AI tools a 7x increase over 2024 and when it when that if 22% is adoption rate for healthcare organizations with every other vertical it's only 9% have implement implemented AI. So what's driving this urgency? How come um healthcare which was a lagger which had a hard time adopting new technologies before has been outpacing everyone now. So for providers the administrative overhead continues to erode the margins and the clinician burnout is real and um one of the biggest driving factor also has been pandemic. I would say the post pandemic there the labor uh shortages and payers facing rising medical cost and constrained premium growth all these things have been driving this um industry much faster than others and can you believe it um healthcare spending itself hit 1.4 billion this year nearly tripling its 2024 investments. If you think of other sectors including law, bank and every everything together it's 1.2 billion. The surge of activity has led to eight healthcare AI unicorns and each of them are valued anywhere from 500 million oh a billion here. So let's take a look at these um few unicorns and which category they are in. Um the most interesting ones are Abridge, Ambience and Open Evidence. All three of them in medical documentation and their valuation are anywhere from five bridge a bridge with 5.3 billion and um ambience with 1.3 billion and open evidence with 6 billion. There's also back office revenue cycle management automation which is um led by the startups commute and smarter which are valued at 6 billion and 1 billion. So this concentration of 1 billion plus companies in medical documentation and RCM isn't just accidental. So it seems like the healthcare IT spend and the work workflows where EI delivers immediate results that's where we are seeing the highest growth and also the other two ones are front office RCM core navigation and payer operations by dist there's only one company we see there so the AI imperative move fast and place big bets so large scale investment and adop options um by leading players you can see has transformed this industry in just 12 months. Kaiser Permanente um permanent deployed Abridge um ambient documentation solutions across 40 hospitals and 600 plus medical offices. Advocate Health evaluated 225 AI solutions and selected 40 use cases. Mayo Clinic is investing more than a dollar more than a billion in AI over the next few years. So all these things are showing how much how many dollars are going into healthcare and how big the healthcare industry and is has been adopting AI faster than average. So how leading healthcare organization are choosing AI? This was a really interesting part. So if you look at that um neoccl clinic, Cleveland Clinic and Kzer permanent they reflect a very new approach. They are looking at one maturity of the technology. They prior they prioritized production ready solutions that performed reliable reliably and um one of the things is the tools that don't directly interface with the patients get faster in approval. This is really important because that means the back office and uh all of the applications with administration which is involving the staff are getting more um adoption faster and short-term value delivery rapid ROI does matter here. So now one of the other other thing was back like 10 years back you were even before co I still remember the procurement cycles for healthcare was especially with the healthare system was I remember somebody mentioning 2 years and sometimes more but all that has shrunk recently. If you can see the health systems have shortened average buying cycles for 8 months for traditional IT purchases to 6 month 6.6 month and 18% acceleration outpatient providers have moved even faster they reduce the timeline from 6 months to 4.4 7 months at 22% improvement. All these are showing how eager um healthcare industry is ready to adopt now um AI. So where where is this AI spend actually going into right I mean if 1.4 4 billion has been spent on healthcare alone out of 1 billion of 1 billion you could see now all flowing to healthcare AI and out surprisingly outpatient providers represent 280 million while payers contribute to only 5%. So you can see the AI adoption in healthcare um largely focused on ambient scribes and coding and billing automation. So the level of need is really high when it comes to healthcare and the ROI is also pretty obvious because we are talking about shortage of staff here and glacial burnout and that is where AI gives the biggest returns. The two categories that address acute pain points are and delivered ROI are ambient clinical documentation which reduces physician burnout and coding and building automation which is about 450 million. So um I I I I remember I recently attended hints conference and everyone talking about uh ambient clinical excited about this ambient clinical documentation which which is very obvious because doc you do not want doctors to be spending so much time on documentation versus spending time with the patients here. Another surprising thing is startups have been have captured 85% of the spending. That's a huge amount. way as long as we have seen there have been players in the market which in healthcare uh more established like epic which have have been a major players but somehow when it comes to AI startups have captured this market much faster and uh one of the thing is they can the biggest advantage for startups have been they can move faster design products natively with AI capital capabilities and they they are not um um surrounded by bureaucracy which large which we see with larger organization. So this is the main reason startups have been winning. So you can see um this report as I share that um from reallocating IT spent to unlocking 740 billion of service dollars healthcare IT has historically been both limited and concentrated but our data reveals that US healthcare spending nan 40 billion annually yet healthcare IT represents 63 billion of that spend. So manual labor and human services are still dominating healthcare industry. So there is still a huge room to grow here. So you can see uh there is a 4.9 trillion opportunity and most of it is also coming through healthcare admin years. So AI will definitely be the next wave of healthcare mod modernization shifting administrative work from manual processes to intelligent automation. So companies like Abridge and open evidence in documentation and commute and smart smarter technologies in back office RCM are competing for larger pools of existing IT spend. So we are only talking about the existing IT spend here but they are not replace not by replacing epic or by augmenting them with automation the in integration strategy offers a clear path to scale as well here. the expanding into the services spend in 2025 healthcare IT spend you could see here um even though it is only 60% of the combined market um of that medical documentation is captured by 19.6 6 billion of that and back office RCM is 188 billion. So one of the other things that is um really puts or um has slows down healthcare also is administrative processes surrounding prior authorization and that has one of the largest opportunities to streamline because administrative staff and nurses have been spending a lot of time on calls to get calls or on hold or going through whole process to get prior authorization. So this there's a huge demand for automating this process and companies looking to transform this space include latent, tandem, mandolin and squad health. So the there are various solutions which are coming out for this. These solutions augment or replace nurses in front office staff who previously used to spend hours filling out forms are on hold with the insurers. Now there are um other ones in healthcare uh front door plus patient engagement market as well. So you could see consumer wellness companies like function health uh ash which take help people take control of their own health and there are other AI triage platforms like doctronic console health torch health and all the other ones. So now um what about the pay operations? When it comes to pay operations, AI has created 50 million plus market selling to payers which is growing. Companies in this sector include distill, interior and autonomize. This segment is still nent compared to the provider side categories and because of the long sales cycle. So as I mentioned before, ambient scribe has been leading this market more than the poor. So so and what does ambience do? They actually use AI to listen to patient doctor conversations, generate clinical notes and populate EHR automatically. So you can imagine how much time this saves. So one of the things um one of the problem with companies focusing just being on scribe is that even though it has reached 40% over the next 3 years um smaller health system and outpatient price also expect adoption to flatten in the next 3 years and that is a concern that can want a stickiness um when it comes to sprite. So when you ask the providers were asked about the next three years, they do not have to stick to um any specific uh startup for their scribing needs. Among outpatient providers, the likelihood to switch was 67% which is pretty high. So that's one of the reason is a lot of these startups including abridge ambience have been um moving into other areas as well. What what is happening is also EHRs which um which were slow to adopt while the startups were coming up with this new innovation with the AI EHRs are also catching up. Ehrs like Epic, Oracle Health, Athena Health Evolo all introduced their own ambient scripes in the recent months and are also building AI directly into the platforms. This is this is a big concern for startups who want to scale and who are focusing only on being a scribe um company. Now when it come to payers um as you have seen before uh providers have been adopting AI much faster than payers and payers are been simply watching as and building defenses around that. Can you imagine if um on the provider side you're able to build all these AI tools that can uh reduce denials uh and have AI present all these claims much faster then there's a surging call and claims volume for payers the payers need to be ready to adopt AI much faster now payers Players also are slowly formulating responses but few have finalized their approach and uh there's as you can see the peer concerns plus expectations the total call volume is much more than before. What's happening in life sciences? um life sciences is has also been comparatively slower to adopt uh than providers. So they are all still building proprietary models for drug discovery. Even though they are adopting it, it's still they are comparatively slow here. um but are but the data here also shows that 66% of the pharma company are also looking to build or fine-tune proprietary models. So AI adoption is also uh underway and is accelerating. It looks like healthcare AI moment is here and AI offers the potential to improve efficiency and quality of care. Providers are seeing um products that deliver ROI and witnessing PS adopt at scale. The buying cycles have compressed from 12 to 18 months to just under six. All this seems to be at a rapid acceleration rate. But but you can see that 80% of the market still remains untapped. So there is still a potential to grow. Even though um um we have healthcare has come to there is still 80% of the market um still remains untapped. The next way would be automating service budgets, building voice interfaces for patient engagement, solving prior authorization at scale and also employing drug discovery. So Menllo ventures partnered with morning console to conduct a study examining this generative AI adoption and uh this has been a very interesting study and uh it's something which both startup and health systems can learn from and um use it further. So as you can see when compared to other verticles we are seeing health care make use of AI much more than others and it's time um it's high time that healthcare did that because um there's a huge administrative burden which only AI can solve and um I would like to say if you like what you saw today comment or subscribe to our channel and comment with whatever startup interesting startup you are seeing. AI healthcare startup that is working on interesting products uh in um that you have seen either in ambient scribbing or in revenue cycle management or um any of the ones which we saw there. Um and um please share with others and hope to share more reports like this and keep watching this channel because we would also have um healthcare leaders and also leaders from finance to talk about what is really happening in AI adoption and we would also bring innovative products from startups here. Thank you everyone. Thanks for watching. Two years, healthcare went from 3% adoption to becoming America's AI powerhouse. >> What if I told you that healthcare is leading in AI adoption compared to every other industry? Would you believe it? Welcome to IDAB podcast um AI in finance and healthcare. Today we're going to talk about AI in healthcare. I'm your host Deept. There's a report that came out by Menllo Ventures which I'm really excited to share with everyone. Um I I remember in the '9s when every other industry was adopting or going going through a digital transformation, healthcare was struggling. It was working with faxes then um and and also it took a while for healthcare industry to adopt um electronic medical records. But when when it comes to AI somehow it's a leader and it has surpassed every other industry we we see out there. So let it let me take you through this um cogent report from Menllo Ventures and let's do a deep dive how is healthcare leading now with AI. So the state of AI in healthcare by Menllo Ventures is a very interesting report. So what it says is healthcare is setting the pace for enterprise AI adoption now and the transformation happened really fast in just 2 years healthcare went from 3% adoption to becoming America's AI powerhouse. So according to this report research 22% of the healthcare organizations have implemented domain specific AI tools a 7x increase over 2024 and when it when that if 22% is adoption rate for healthcare organizations with every other vertical it's only 9% have implement implemented AI. So what's driving this urgency? How come um healthcare which was a lagard which had a hard time adopting new technologies before has been outpacing everyone now. So for providers the administrative overhead continues to erode the margins and the clinician burnout is real and um one of the biggest driving factor also has been pandemic. I would say the post pandemic there the labor uh shortages and payers facing rising medical cost and constrained premium growth. All these things have been driving this um industry much faster than others. And can you believe it? Um healthcare spending itself hit 1.4 billion this year nearly tripling its 2024 investments. If you think of other sectors including law, bank and everything together, it's 1.2 billion. The surge of activity has led to eight healthcare AI unicorns and each of them are valued anywhere from 500 million oh a billion here. So let's take a look at these um few unicorns and which category they are in. Um the most interesting ones are Abridge, Ambience and Open Evidence. All three of them in medical documentation and their valuation are anywhere from five bridge a bridge with 5.3 billion and um ambience with 1.3 billion and open evidence with 6 billion. There's also back office revenue cycle management automation which is um led by the startups commute and smarter which are valued at 6 billion and 1 billion. So this concentration of 1 billion plus companies in medical documentation and RCM isn't just accidental. So it seems like the healthcare IT spend and the work workflows where EI delivers immediate results that's where we are seeing the highest growth and also the other two ones are front office RCM core navigation and payer operations by dist there's only one company we see there so the AI imperial move fast and place big bets so large investment and adoption um by leading players you can see has transformed this industry in just 12 months. Kaiser permanente um permanent deployed abridge um ambient documentation solutions across 40 hospitals and 600 plus medical offices. Advocate health evaluated 225 AI solutions and selected 40 use cases. Mayo Clinic is investing more than a dollar more than a billion in AI over the next few years. So all these things are showing how much how many dollars are going into healthcare and how big the healthcare industry and is has been adopting AI faster than average. So how leading healthcare organization are choosing AI? This is a really interesting part. So if you look at that um Neo Clinic, Cleveland Clinic and Kzer Permanente reflect a very new approach. They are looking at one maturity of the technology. They prior they prioritize production relation solutions that performed reliable reliably and um one of the things is the tools that don't directly interface with the patients get faster approval. This is really important because that means the back office and uh all of the applications with administration which is involving the staff are getting more um adoption faster and short-term value delivery rapid ROI does matter here. So now one of the other other thing was back like 10 years back even before co I still remember the procurement cycles for healthcare was especially with the healthare system was I remember somebody mentioning 2 years and sometimes more but all that has shrunk recently. If you can see the health systems have shortened average buying cycles from 8 months for traditional IT purchases to 6 month 6.6 month and 18% acceleration outpatient providers have moved even faster. They reduce the timeline from 6 months to 4.4 7 months at 22% improvement. All these are showing how eager um healthcare industry is ready to adopt now um AI. So where where is this AI spend actually going into right I mean if 1.4 4 billion has been spent on healthcare alone out of 1 billion of 1 billion you could see now all flowing to healthcare AI and out surprisingly outpatient providers represent 280 million while payers contribute to only 5%. So you can see the AI adoption in healthcare um largely focused on ambient scribes and coding and billing automation. So the level of need is really high when it comes to healthcare and the ROI is also pretty obvious because we are talking about shortage of stuff here and glacier burnout and that is where AI gives the biggest returns. The two categories that address acute pain points are and deliver ROI are ambient clinical documentation which reduces physician burnout and coding and bill automation which is about 450 million. So um I I I I remember I recently attended him conference at everyone talking about uh ambient clinical excited about this ambient clinical documentation which which is very obvious because doc you do not want doctors to be spending so much time on documentation versus spending time with the patients here. Another surprising thing is startups have been have captured 85% of the spending. That's a huge amount. way as long as we have seen there have been players in the market which in healthcare uh more established like epic which have have been a major player but somehow when it comes to AI startups have captured this market much faster and um one of the thing is they can the biggest advantage with startups have been they can move faster design products natively with EI capabilities and they they are not um um surrounded by bureaucracy which large which we see with larger organization. So this is the main reason startups have been winning. So you can see um this report as I share that um from reallocating IT spend to unlocking 740 billion of service dollars healthcare IT has historically been both limited and concentrated but our data reveals that US healthcare spending n 740 billion annually yet healthcare IT represents 63 billion of that spend. So manual labor and human services are still dominating healthcare industry. So there is still a huge room to grow here. So you can see uh there is a 4.9 trillion opportunity and most of it is also coming through healthcare admin here. So AI will definitely be the next wave of healthcare mo modernization shifting administrative work from manual processes to intelligent automation. So companies like Abridge and open evidence in documentation and comm smarter technologies in back office RCM are competing for larger pools of existing IT spend. So we are only talking about the existing IT spend here but they are not replace not by replacing epic or by augmenting them with automation the in integration strategy offers a clear path to scale as well here. the expanding into the services spend in 2025 healthcare IT spend you could see here um even though it is only 60% of the combined market um of that medical documentation is captured by 19.6 6 billion of that and back office RCM is 188 billion. So one of the other things that is um really puts or um has slows down healthcare also is administrative processes surrounding prior authorization and that has one of the largest opportunities to streamline because administrative staff and nurses have been spending a lot of time on calls to get calls or on hold or going through whole process to get prior authorization. So this there's a huge demand for automating this process and companies looking to transform this space include latent, tandem, mandolin and squad health. So the there are various solutions which are coming out for this. These solutions augment or replace nurses in front office staff who previously used to spend hours filling out forms or on hold with the insurers. Now there are um other ones in healthcare uh front door plus patient engagement market as well. So you could see consumer wellness companies like function health uh ash which take help people take control of their own health and there are other AI triage platforms like doctronic console health torch health and all the other ones. So now um what about the P operations? When it comes to Per operations, AI has created 50 million plus market selling to payers which is growing. Companies in this sector include distill, anterior and autonomize. This segment is still nent compared to the provider side categories and because of the long sales cycle. So as I mentioned before, ambient scribe has been leading this market more than before. So so and what does ambient scribe do? They actually use AI to listen to patient doctor conversations, generate clinical notes and populate EHR automatically. So you can imagine how much time this saves. So one of the things uh one of the problem with companies focusing just being on scribe is that even though it has reached 40% over the next 3 years um smaller health system and outpatient price also expect adoption to flatten in the next 3 years and that is a concern. Second one is stickiness um when it comes to sprite. So when you ask the providers were asked about the next three years, they do not have to stick to um any specific um startup for their scribing needs. Among outpatient providers the likelihood to switch was 67% which is pretty high. So that's one of the reason is a lot of these startups including abridge ambience have been um moving into other areas as well. What what is happening is also EHRs which um which were slow to adopt while the startups were coming out with this new innovation with the AI. EHRs are also catching up. Ehrs like Epic, Oracle Health, Athena Health. So all introduced their own ambient scripes in the recent months and are also building AI directly into the platforms. This is this is a big concern for startups who want to scale and who are focusing only on being a scribe um company. Now when it come to payers um as you have seen before uh providers have been adopting AI much faster than the payers and payers are been simply watching as and building defenses around that. Can you imagine if uh on the providing side you were able to build all these AI tools that can uh reduce denials uh and have AI present all these claims much faster then there's a surging call and claims volume for payers the payers need to be ready to adopt AI much faster now payers also are slowly formulating responses but few have finalized their approach and uh there's as you can see the peer concerns plus expectations the total call volume is much more than before. What's happening in life sciences? um life sciences is has also been comparatively slower to adopt uh than providers. So they're all still building proprietary models for drug discovery. Even though they are adopting it, it's still they are comparatively slow here. um but are but the data here also shows that 66% of the pharma company are also looking to build or fine-tune proprietary models. The AI adoption is also uh underway and is accelerating. It looks like healthcare AI moment is here and AI offers the potential to improve efficiency and quality of care. Providers are seeing um products that deliver ROI and witnessing peers adopt at scale. The buying cycles have compressed from 12 to 18 months to just under six. All this seems to be at a rapid acceleration rate. But but you can see that 80% of the market still remains untapped. So there is still a potential to grow. Even though um um we have healthcare has come to there is still 80% of the market um still remains untapped. The next way would be automating service budgets, building voice interfaces for patient engagement, solving prior authorization at scale and also going drug discovery. So Menllo ventures partnered with morning console to conduct a study examining this generative AI adoption and uh this has been a very interesting study and uh it's something which both startup and health systems can learn from and um use it further. So as you can see when compared to other verticles we are seeing health care make use of AI much more than others and it's time um it's high time that healthcare did that because um there's a huge administrative burden which only AI can solve and um I would like to say if you like what you saw today comment or subscribe to our channel and comment with whatever startup interesting startup you are seeing AI healthcare startup that is working on interesting products uh and um that you have seen either in the ambient scribbing or in revenue cycle management or um any of the ones which we saw there um and um please share with us and Hope to share more reports like this and keep watching this channel because we would also help um healthcare leaders and also leaders from finance to talk about what is really happening in AI adoption and we would also bring innovative products from startups here. Thank you everyone. Thanks for watching.