Title: HealthcareLINC Q&A: The risks of using AI virtual scribes/ambient listening for documentation
Channel: McAfee & Taft
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cRXdT8XTREM
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

An ambient
listening device or virtual scribe, is part of Electronic Health
Record Technology, or EHR, that is being used
by providers, physicians and hospitals to record the conversation
between a patient and a provider. Develop a transcript that is then reviewed
and edited by the provider, and becomes part of the patient's
permanent medical record. Most EHR systems have an ambient listening
or virtual scribe option, and it's being used more
and more by providers. The intent is that the provider
would review the transcript, make any edits, and then approve it,
and it would then become part of the permanent
medical record for the patient. Most patients are given the option
to either consent to the use of ambient listening technology, or decline it
for their visit with the provider. There have been a number of studies and surveys related to the use of ambient
listening devices. Providers report positive experiences
with the use of the technology, because they can spend more time
discussing the patient's condition and engaging with the patient,
and less time staring at the computer screen and entering notes
into the electronic health record. Providers also report less pajama time. Pajama time is a term
used to describe the time that providers have to spend outside
of their regular workday. Entering medical records
in the electronic health record. Overall, experts
predict that these are positive factors that should lead to less provider
burnout over time. Likewise, patients
report positive experiences. They believe that they are more engaged
with their provider when an ambient listening
device is being used, that the provider is paying more attention
to what the patient has to say, and that the patient is more involved
in the care and treatment decisions. Federal and state law require that providers maintain
an accurate and complete medical record. One potential risk of using an ambient listening device are errors
that may occur in the transcription that are not caught by the physician
or provider when they review and approve the transfer option to become part
of the patient's permanent medical record. An example might be that a physician
tells the patient during a visit that they're going
to prescribe 0.5mg of a drug. The listening device may transcribe that incorrectly to be five milligrams. If the physician does not catch that error
before it's filled by the patient
in a prescription, this could lead to harm to the patient
and liability for the physician. Two phenomenons involved here. One is called hallucinations,
which is the AI term for incorrect text. So when the AI technology
actually invents text, something that was not actually said
in the conversation. The second issue is automation bias, and that's a provider's preference
to rely on what the transcription provides,
even if there's errors in it. And so when a provider reviews
the transcript, it's vitally important that they carefully
review everything that's part of the transcript before approving it
to become part of the medical record. So there's not that risk to the provider
and to the patient. There can be risks from a medical
malpractice perspective, and Oklahoma medical records must be maintained
for a period of six years. Defense counsel advise that
the medical record should be unchanged, and there should only be one
medical record. When the ambient listening device records the conversation and the audio recording,
and then that's transcribed. This is essentially a dual medical record,
meaning that there's a medical record, the permanent medical record,
and that for some period of time, there's another portion
of the medical record that may or may not become part
of the permanent medical record. So there's a risk that a plaintiff's
lawyer would claim that when records are produced
in a lawsuit, that the complete medical record
has not been produced, and that there's been spoilage
of evidence, meaning that the hospital, the physician group,
the provider has deleted or destroyed evidence
that's necessary for the lawsuit. The bottom line is that ambient listening
device technology is a tool. It can be a helpful tool,
both from the provider's perspective and a positive patient experience. However, it doesn't absolve the provider
of the obligation to carefully review and edit the transcript before it becomes
part of the medical record. One recommendation is that providers should adopt a comprehensive policy
addressing the use of AI ambient technology as part of a patient visit, and their obligations to carefully review the documentation before it becomes
part of the medical record. The policy should also state that the audio recording in the transcript
is not part of the legal medical record that is just transitory
communications in draft form, and is not intended
to be the permanent medical record. Additionally,
the policy should provide that physicians and other practitioners will be educated
regarding the use of AI technology and the need to carefully review
documentation before its uploaded in the patient's
medical record. In order to be of any benefit,
a provider must adopt and implement the AI ambient use technology policy before litigation is commenced. We've advised a number of clients
regarding the use of ambient technology. If you have any questions,
please reach out to us at McAfee and Taft.