Title: AIMI Grand Rounds: The Implementation and Evaluation of Generative AI Solutions in Healthcare
Channel: Stanford AIMI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KPo9rlwavwU
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

All right, great. So, uh, good morning everyone. Um, welcome to the Amy Grand Rounds. This is a monthly series hosted by the Stanford Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and Imaging and takes place on the fourth Tuesday of every month. Um, I'm Jason Fes, an incoming assistant professor in the department of biomedical data science and division of biomedical informatics. Um so I'm excited to uh be uh the moderator for today's uh grand rounds. Uh just to uh uh tee up our next session. Next month's ground rounds will be with Dr. Jonathan Chen where we he will discuss evaluating generative AI implementations in healthcare. That is on Tuesday, November 18th from 8 to 9:00 p.m. And a link to register will be shared in the chat. Uh some brief announcements. Uh the AI plus health 2025 um uh session is up coming up and we'd like to invite you all to our engaging program held virtually on December 9th through 10th, 2025 focusing on practical applications and transformative innovations in healthcare through artificial intelligence. AI plus health is Stanford's largest convening for AI and health and medicine and is hosted by Stanford Amy and CME. The event website will have more information on how to register and that can be found in the chat. Uh some brief housekeeping items. If you have any questions during this talk, uh you will be muted. So please submit them using the Q&A function and uh I and others will monitor uh QAs for a session at the end of uh Shrea's talk. And so without further ado, I'd like to introduce uh Shrea. Shrea Sa Sha is MD FACP is a physician leader in healthcare informatics board certified in clinical informatics and internal medicine. She is a clinician, educator and researcher with special interests in artificial intelligence and health IT usability as a medical informatics director of primary care and population health for Stanford medicine. She leads the design, implementation, and optimization of health information technology in support of clinicians and patients at Stanford. She's also an associate medical director of the Stanford Healthcare AI research team known as the heart team whose vision is to be a global leader in the implementation, evaluation, and teaching of AI in health and healthcare. And today's talk will be the implementation and evaluation of generative AI solutions in healthcare. And with that, I'm happy to hand it off to Shrea. >> Thank you so much, Jason. I'm going to go ahead and share my slides. And all right, can you guys see my slides? Okay, perfect. Thank you so much. So, thanks for that kind intro. As Jason mentioned, um these are some of the different hats that I wear. And so these roles help me bring a clinical first lens into our a healthcare AI evaluations which I'm going to talk about today. Apologies I have um a little under the weather so sorry if I'm coughing intermittently. So our work started back in 2023. That's when our team first started and that came at this time when there was this rapid availability of generative AI technology. Stanford Healthcare at the time had this exciting opportunity to embed a GPT4based tool directly within our electronic health record that could help draft replies to patient messages. We were one of the first organizations to pilot this tool and so it was a great opportunity to study how generative AI could transform real world clinical workflows. Through that project, we formed an amazing collaboration across the office of the CMIO, IT or technology and digital solutions, nursing informatics, our clinical informatics fellowship program, and then also the Stanford Healthcare AI applied research team. I think one of the strengths of this cross-disciplinary team is we're able to design our evaluations and metrics in a way that align with operational and clinical needs of the organization, but also create opportunities to try to disseminate our work through scholarship. And that aligns well with Stanford's medicine's tripart mission to advance clinical care, research, and education. >> [snorts] >> So we always start with any of our evaluations of thinking first about the goals because there are so many interesting research questions we could ask about these tools and about the implementations but we have to prioritize our goals early on. And so some of the things that we like to think about are are we helping to make an operational decision? For example, are we deciding whether we should sign a contract with a new vendor? Are there value metrics that we're hoping to track? An example could be an annual operating goal that um involves faster turnaround time to close charts. Do we need to gather feedback to help refine these AI tools and workflows? And then lastly, is there an opportunity for research and scholarship such as a peer-reviewed publication? So once we've nailed down those evaluation goals, then we kind of go through these steps. So we embed into clinical operations and partner with subject matter experts and strong partnerships are so important for all of our evaluations. We prioritize metrics that matter. Like I mentioned earlier, practical approach really prioritizes operational KPIs so we can understand the values of potential AI solutions. We often have to balance rigor with practicality. For example, one limitation is it may not always be possible for us to pause updates to the AA technology itself during a study. And so that's something we have to balance. And then lastly, right sizing the evaluation to the goals, how big and how long the evaluation should be really depends on our goals. So these foundational principles help us analyze rapidly and um through this process, we've been able to replicate this across different evaluations. Over time, we've also identified some best practices to help guide our evaluations in terms of the methodology. So we try when possible it may not be possible to have all these be feasible but when possible we try to use experimental design with prospective evaluations conduct mixed methods evaluations leverage evaluative frameworks which I'll um share an example identify validated measurement tools that we can use and then also allow flexibility because like I mentioned these health IT interventions especially these generative AI tools are new they're rapidly evolving and So we have to be flexible with our approach. There are a lot of wellestablished frameworks that can be leveraged to study generative AI implementations. An example framework that we've used for our generative AI evaluations at Stanford is the reimprism framework. So what we did was we adapted the original framework to make it work for our generative AI implementations. A traditional implementation would focus on patients as the recipient of a healthcare intervention. But we know with health IT and generative AI, a lot of the solutions involve the clinician as the recipient of the intervention. So we adopted this framework and that was really helpful. I think a framework in general, it doesn't have to be this one. There's a lot out there. It's really helpful to provide some guided structure to an evaluation plan and also helpful if you're trying to publish um findings. So then using frameworks like ream prism we're able to assess clinician perspectives on these generative AI solutions. Um for example how useful is the tool? What are barriers and facilitators of the tool? How can we improve the tool? And then what is the impact on clinician burden and burnout? Uh we've also found some tips when it comes to selecting survey measurement tools because what we're often trying to do is collect high yield data but also balance survey length for our respondents who are often busy clinicians. So some of our best practices include trying to identify measures that really tie back to those evaluation goals. What are going to help define and inform future use? Um, we try to use a validated instrument when possible, but that said, some of those validated instruments are really lengthy. So, we often select subcomponents that are going to be most relevant for our study. And examples of survey instruments that we've used include um light to measure usability, NASA tax load burden to measure um burden, and then the Stamford Professional Fulfillment Index to help measure burnout. So with that, I'll dive into a couple case studies next to share how we've applied some of those um foundational guiding steps into our generative AI pilot evaluations. The first one I'll share about is our pilot evaluation of a generative AI ambient scribe tool. We are one of the first organizations to pilot this. So we had to kind of develop our evaluation framework from the ground up. So just in terms of the problem we're trying to solve with ambient AI scribes, it's clinical documentation burden. I'm sure those on the call um have heard this a lot before and the known linkage with clinician burnout. Physicians are spending nearly half of their day on electronic health record and more than a third of that time is spent on documentation and chart review tasks. So ambient AIC scribe technology works with voicetoext capture during a visit. It generates a transcript and then a large language model drafts a clinical note that a clinician can review and edit. There are lots of ambient AIC scribe solutions on the market. The tool that we use is integrated directly into the electronic health record. So to activate this tool, I um pull up the electronic health record mobile app on my phone. Um I click on the patient schedule that I'm seeing. I let my patient know that a secure recording tool is going to be used. press a button and then at the end of the visit I just press the button again and then within a few minutes a draft note is generated that I can then review and edit um before signing. Before starting our pilot, we had to go back to those goals and really clarify what the goals were going to be of our evaluation. And for this pilot, our primary object objectives were operational decision making, a [snorts] decision on whether we should proceed with an enterprisewide vendor contract for the ambient AIC scribe solution, and then also value metrics, specifically the impact on clinician burden and burnout. We had 50 clinicians that were in our pilot for three months and they were from both primary care and ambulatory specialties. um it was about 50% primary care and overall utilization across all encounters was about 50% and that's on the yellow in the left. As a comparison, the utilization of AI generated drafts for patient messages which I mentioned earlier is typically reported at around 10 to 20%, so 50% is um is pretty good uptake. We found higher utilization of certain parts of the note that were generated, specifically the history and the assessment and plan sections compared to the results and the physical exam. When we looked at the change in documentation time during the pilot period compared to the pre-pilot period, just to orient. So the yaxis on this graph shows the change in average time spent in note per minute. The dotted line um that's red is zero and that represents no change in time. Dots below the red line represent physicians who save time and then above the red line represents physicians who spent more time after ambient AI was made available. So as you'll see the majority of individuals fall below the red line, therefore save time using ambient AI. This change was stat statistically significant with an average time savings of about 30 seconds per note. We also looked at um after hours EHR time, also known as pajama time, and found a decrease of five minutes and then also a decrease of about 20 minutes in total EHR time. And both these trends were statistically significant. Our survey results were encouraging. In just 3 months, clinicians reported a 25 point reduction in documentation burden on a 100point scale and a twopoint reduction in burnout on a 10-point scale. And given that one of our primary objectives with this ambient AICcribe tool was to help with clinician wellness, these findings were optimistic and hopefully we'll see these trends continue beyond that pilot. Um we also looked at some post survey to look at how clinicians found the tool in terms of usability and they reported favorable utility. um it was easy to use. It improved their quality of clinical documentation and also efficiency and 78% of them could see themselves using the tool in their practice long term. And this was only after using it for 3 months. We also asked our clinicians to estimate their perceived time savings per half day of clinic and they thought on average it saved them 20 minutes per half day. um that ranged from 90 minutes time saved to 90 minutes additional time spent. And beyond the numbers, what also stood out were some of the personal stories from our physicians. Through doing interviews, we were able to learn how AI changed their experience with documentation. So um specific examples included positive impact on workload and work life integration and that supported our quantitative findings of decreased burden and burnout. Improved patient engagement. Clinicians really described feeling more present with their patients. We heard themes like more face-toface time, more eye contact instead of staring at the computer. Um, physicians also found that reviewing and editing a note felt a lot easier and less mentally and cognitively exhausting than creating notes from scratch. So, I think it wasn't just about typing less, but also offloading some of the cognitive load throughout the day. Um, instead of relying on memory to capture key details, they knew the tool would take care of that. So, I liked one of the quotes from our clinicians that puts it best. I don't know if it saved time, but it saved anxiety. And then we also learned about improvements um and barriers to adoption that we could improve on in the future, including that it requires an iOS device. And then also some note editing requirements. Um some physicians felt they were so efficient with their existing documentation workloads that it wasn't necessarily adding significant value given the time needed to edit. One of the biggest work challenges we find with adopting AI tools like Ambient AI scribes in general is they're not going to fit every clinician's workflow the same. So through those interviews, we also learned about strategies that could improve ambient AI adoption, including personalization features. So um customization at the individual user level like formatting length, contextual refinement. Our clinicians wanted the tool to learn from their patients history. They wanted the tool to learn from their prior notes and be able to um generate new content based on that. We also got a lot of feedback about wanting more workflow integration, like wanting to be able to support more parts of the workflow like drafting patient instructions and placing orders. And then lastly, we also found a lot of clinicians wanted more hands-on support during the initial setup process. And so that led us to partner with a program that we have called Epic Concierge. It's one of our um it provides one-on-one ambulatory support for our clinicians and Epic training and it's been around for 5 years. Our clinicians love it and by being able to embed ambient AI support with this epic concurge program that was known to our clinicians, I think it really helped with um adoption uptake. So even though obtaining feedback wasn't actually a primary goal of this pilot evaluation, it was really great to get that feedback and um and in fact one of the personalization features that we received feedback about has already been implemented and so it's nice to see that type of feedback loop happen. Just a big shout out to our ambient AI scribe team also lots of others that aren't listed here for making all this happen. Um, the ambient EICcribe tool has been made made available across our enterprise and we've had over 1,200 clinicians use the tool and over half a million recordings since uh since the pilot. Next, I'll um share results from a pilot that took place earlier this year and this was with a novel generative AI tool that assists clinicians in sharing test results with patients. So for this case study, the problem we are trying to solve specifically is related to inbasket management in the electronic health record and for test results. So we know inbasket management contributes to clinician burden and burnout. Immediate release of test results can heighten patient anxiety and we know that patients prefer results that are explained directly by their clinicians. This tool was actually built in-house by our IT software development team in technology and digital solutions. And this gave us a unique advantage because we were able to customize the tool from the ground up based on frontline clinician feedback. This is how the tool looks when we see it in the electronic health record. Um, so if we're in the in basket and reviewing a patient test result, we could see this AI generated draft result comment show up and it'll attach to the result, we can click on it, use it as a starting point for our explanation back to the patient and then edit before sending it to the patient. Just like with all our other pilot evaluations, we really needed to nail down what our goals were. So for this one, it was operational decisionmaking. Should we scale the tool across the enterprise? Um, do clinicians like it? Do they find the tool is acceptable? And then for this one, feedback was actionable since the tool was built inhouse and also very important because this tool was so novel and in very early developmental stages. Among 244 pilot clinicians across primary care, 93 completed post surveys. And through that we learned that the tool was found to be easy to use. Over half used it frequently and thought it was ready to scale broadly. Um 72% also reported higher quality explanations for patients. And that was great because we know that patients prefer these results explained to them directly by clinicians. Clinicians also estimated that the tool saved them about a minute per each result note they sent to patients. And through some free text responses, we were able to learn some other insights like um they found it was valuable for patient engagement. It was helping to deliver clear and empathetic explanations for patients. Improved efficiency. Um the clinicians said they were quicker to release test result explanations for patients. And we know that since these can be a source of anxiety for patients, it can be nice to get those explanations faster. Clinicians did identify accuracy and completeness concerns like missed or misinterpreted labs as well as omissions. And we also received a lot of great feedback on how to improve the tool like wanting more patient context sent back to the large language model and then also improved workflow integration. Um these tool these results often come back in kind of groups over time. And so one of the feedback was can we update the draft sequentially for results that are released over time. And since this tool again was developed in-house, we were able to quickly incorporate changes based on feedback. So one really nice example of this rapid iteration feedback loop came early on. Um, one of the points of feedback that came up was that the tool was missing some clinical context like whether the patient had had prior lab or imaging results because we really think about interpreting those differently if there's something to compare it to. And so the software development team was able to act on that quickly and that feedback and then clinicians we now get draft result comments that incorporate historical data for important trends. So, it's just really great to be able to provide that feedback and then see um changes to the technology happen so quickly. Again, just a thank you to our AIMB basket evaluation team. Um that AI results tool has just recently been made available across the enterprise for all ambulatory clinicians. [snorts] So, I hope those case studies were helpful to share our team's approach to generative AI pilot evaluations. Um, we also try to anticipate what the story might be to tell in a year. With tools like ambient AI, the current focus on these tools is really important and it's to reduce clinician burden and burnout. And there's a lot that's been published about that since our pilot, but we're also interested in thinking about what are some of those other stories to tell. So, here's four areas I'd love to see us advance with generative AI over the next couple years. Um, first we've done a great job understanding clinician perspectives through these pilots, but how do patients feel about these tools? So, we recently conducted patient surveys to help understand patient perspectives on the use of ambient AI scribes during their visits. This work was funded by the Stamford Center for Digital Health and we partnered with Stamford Healthc Care's Office of Patient Experience to conduct the surveys. Um, prelim results show that patients think that the tools, ambient AI specifically, um, are favorable and overall find them pretty acceptable. So, that's exciting to see. U, most patients also wanted their clinicians to continue using ambient AICE tools during future visits, which is really great to hear. And patients are interested in using new technology just in general. So, we could expect them to be engaging more and more with new technology for their health care concerns, but also I think they're expecting us to use it more um during their visits. Next, I think it's really exciting to reimagine my clinic with generative AI integrated throughout the clinical workflow. Um, for example, before a visit, I'd love it if there was a chatbot that patients could engage with. Um, it could help to gather their history, gather their symptoms, flush some of that out, and then provide the clinician with a concise chart review summary of what the patient's there for, and really be able to focus on, you know, why, what the patient cares about during that visit. And then during the encounter, ambient AI, of course, could help capture the conversation, draft notes. Um, AI could suggest appropriate labs, imaging, medication orders. based on I think not just the clinical context but would also be great if it could pull in from evidence-based guidelines and also patient history um towards the end of the visit AI could generate personalized after visit summaries for patients and these could be tailored to the patients condition preferred language literacy level I think these would enhance patient understanding and also their engagement with um with follow-ups after a visit and finally AI could suggest ICD10 and level of service codes in real time and that could support accurate documentation and and appropriate reimbursement. I think the more seamlessly AI fits into the way clinicians work um the more value it will bring. So I am really excited about the future and and what promise generative AI holds for my clinic. Third, I think AI tools can help us rapidly synthesize patient specific data available in the electronic health records such as chart notes, recent labs, problem lists. Our Stanford data science team has recently developed a new tool called chat ehr chatter that that helps support this. AI can also draw from aggregate population level data. For example, Epic has this data set called Epic Cosmos, and that can help identify patterns across thousands of similar patients. And then finally, I think there's a real opportunity to integrate guidelines and clinical evidence from trusted resources like PubMed, up-to-date open evidence. Right now, I use all of these very often, but they're not linked to a patient's chart. They don't understand patient context. um and they're also not not aware of some of that aggregate population data. I think there will be real power when we can combine all of these and be able to have that existing data in the electronic health record for each patient. I can be in a patient's chart and understand how they compare to that aggregate population data, but also be able to pull in evidence-based clinical knowledge system specifically targeted for them. And then I think I'll be able to get some really nice AI enabled insights that are personalized but also evidence-based to support clinical decisionmaking. And lastly, um I think in terms of the evaluation side of things, we have to think about the key evaluation metrics for the future. So, I've talked a lot about pilot evaluations, but what are some of the things that are going to help us understand long-term impacts and return on investment with generative AI tools? Some of the things I think will be crucial to measure our clinician well-being. Um, beyond just the pilots, but also making sure that we're continuing to monitor that um long term. Patient outcomes, of course, are going to be important. financial ROI because these tools are expensive and then also sustainability both at the organizational level so adoption workflow culture staffing and how these AI tools might impact that but also the environmental sustainability um energy use carbon footprint and I think another way that I like to frame this um because it's easy to remember is thinking about the impacts on the quintuple aim plus sustainability ility. So with that, I think one of the most exciting things with these generative AI tools is that frontline clinicians really can play a direct role in co-designing and refining these tools in close partnership with technology teams. So looking ahead, I think there's so much promise not just for efficiency but also really helping to get us that quintuple aim and doing so sustainably. So improving experiences for our patients, for our clinicians, advancing equity, and then just shaping the use of AI and healthcare to be um effective and impactful. So thank you for that. All right. Um, are are you you done, Trey? Ready for some questions? So, we got a couple in the the channel. Um, so, uh, first, uh, as new AI products enter the healthcare market, what processes used to determine which innovations are simply shiny new objects and which may address actual significant clinical or operational problems? Um, and is there a process or initial review committee that decides which products wore into more in-depth review? I think this is a real concern is the just the flood of, you know, hypey things coming out of the the space right now. So, how do you how do you make sense of all the the the real from the noise? >> Sure. So, I can just speak to to first kind of at the organizational level. Um there are a lot of important AI governance processes in place and that's to to your point to make sure that there's processes in place. So we have at Stanford our data science team has developed a firm evaluation and that's to make sure that you know AI tools are fair useful make sure that they're impactful and addressing real workflow problems. We also have on those teams folks from ethics and legal and compliance just to make sure that there's also patient experience people on those teams just to make sure that we're thinking about all of the different implications of these tools. So that's from kind of the bigger org picture. I think governance is really important and having those those steps that are very um clear and explicit so that people know how to navigate them is key. as far as kind of as a more frontline clinician like how I think about it both as an informaticist and a clinician I think for me it's does the technology team understand my workflows and can have they kind of for example um shadowed and have they shown that they actually understand some of the workflow challenges and problems that they're pitching to solve and I think a lot of times I can tell, you know, whether something is very well thoughtfully designed and people understand what what clinicians are dealing with or um what their end users are dealing with day-to-day versus something that sounds really great and I'm like, "Oh, that sounds so exciting." And then I try to learn a bit more about it and I'm like, "Oh, that's not going to fit in my workflow." You know, for me, if if I have to go to like a different application, I'm already probably not going to use that thing during a very busy clinic day. And so, um, really understanding the workflow, I think, is key. And co-development. And I can often tell when there's tools where they've partnered with frontline end users like clinicians or nurses to help define and and redesign what that tool might be versus um if I'm asking a lot of questions that seem like you know maybe they haven't had that many clinicians involved from the ground up. >> Great. Cool. Thank you. Um, another question is, uh, when you say there are links that you use in powerful tools on decision support, but no integration with current workflow in parenthesis epic, uh, when will we get this integration and do you think it'll hold up? Are there HIPPA or data sharing issues at play? Um, yeah, that's a great question. So >> really great question and I think about this a lot because right now for example um I use up toate and up to-date I can access from Epic the way that we have it set up from our electronic health record with a button and um I'm already logged in and I think that's important because anytime you have to log in that's going to add another another barrier to potentially using that. Um, up todate has released an like a more LLMbased AI expert tool, but for now it's still being used a lot like kind of a knowledge retrieval where you search and then you review articles. And so, um, I think open evidence though there is that potential where you want to make sure you're not putting any PHI or any um, protected health information in there. So right now I I have an account for open evidence and I just make sure that when I'm using it I'm putting in a very generic um learning question. So you know in a patient that I I might approximate the age with this medical condition. Um, a recent one that I actually asked is in a patient who's recently had um, a procedure for a hip fracture, how long would they be recommended to continue um, DVT prophylaxis for after their procedure and what are some of the guideline references that you can cite for me? And so I think that was something that I felt very comfortable putting in open evidence because it was deidentified. But in the future, what would be great is me not having to, you know, take the couple steps to provide that patient context and to be able to link it to the patient record and not have to worry about the privacy concerns because then that would mean that we have a BAA and we've gone through the the risk component of making sure that all of that information is secure and remains private. And I and I do think the Stanford data science team as far as future thinking and innovation is definitely thinking about how to integrate knowledge um retrieval sources and some of those types of trusted resources for clinical evidence and you know combine that with a use a use case like chatty HR that has patient context in there. >> Great. Yeah. Yeah. That's a it's a a perennial challenge to integrate stuff into Epic, right, in a patient and safe way. So, I think that's a quite a that's going to be an interesting nut to crack from Epic's side and from the user side. So, I think that everyone kind of wants it, right? So, it needs to it will eventually happen. Um, another question uh first thanks for excellent this is from Daniel Cap. Um, excellent presentation. Uh, he has a concern about biases in the AI programs used. From what I've seen in the literature, they are developed to a positive slant like uh like sycophant tech behavior is definitely common and make the user satisfied. Could this lead to a selective bias in presenting report uh results say something from a radiology report? >> Very very important great question. Um, I think this is where that close partnership with technology teams and with our my health software development team has been so crucial because we were able to give a lot of feedback to help with the props. And I think that's really what makes generative AI so special is that we can really try and rightsize the outputs as much as possible by really refining those prompts. So, for example, in the very beginning of that result message um pilot before we even piloted it and we just had a couple beta testers, the initial output without it really being care thoughtfully fine-tuned with clinicians was really long. So it was like like sometimes several paragraphs long and did did you know have some more of that um riskier language like it was actually trying to provide some of the medical followup and provide some medical reasoning and then through that very quickly we were able to provide feedback refine the prompts and so you can try to guide it to not provide follow-up recommendations, you know, be objective. Be be as objective as possible. Um, so really summarize it and not try to go to those next steps. That said, all of our clinicians know that these are drafts and so it's really important to review them. I think by shortening the drafts, that's helped because then it takes less time to review them. They're much faster to review so you can just quickly confirm that what it says lines up with what you want to share. and then um you can you know go ahead and release those. So I think it's important to make those as objective as possible. you are going to lose the some of the the the things that might be nice to have like wouldn't it be great if it knew exactly what I would want to do next to work up anemia in this patient but unfortunately we know that that's going to be very difficult because you have different workups for different patients and the context is really important there and also clinicians are going to have different preferences for how to work things up so I think the best way to make that as safe as possible is to really narrow the prompts to to have it be objective and just summarizing. >> Got it. Got it. Cool. So, uh this is a question from Paul Pitlick. This is a great question. If another health care system wants to do this type of project, do they have to start from scratch or how do you see the sort of lessons of what Stanford's done being taken and incorporated by them? Um yeah, [clears throat] health systems are all they're kind of unique creatures. So it's interesting to think about what yeah what do you think the transferable lessons and best way to convey them are. Yeah, I think that in the future we'll probably you know we used to share a lot of the electronic health record resources things like sharing smart phrases which are documentation templates and sharing some of our rules that we set up to create clinical decision support and I think the future it's sharing prompts. So I know for example our electronic health record there's a user web where you can go and you can share specific prompts that you might have um used for a tool and so I think it's just reframing what it is that we're sharing but I think in this case it'll be sharing prompts um sharing key tips on how to integrate things how to make them more you know friendly to the clinical end user and because we've done a lot of pilot testing. I think we have some good good lessons to share there. >> Nice. Thank you. Um so a question from Mary Goldstein. Uh thinking about their p her patient population and with large numbers of older age group patients who have many multiple medical problems. What is your vision of how these tools will address the whole patient across their individual uh journey across all of their different uh conditions where you often have conflicting recommendations or you know it's maybe unclear what's the best evidence-based guideline to follow at any specific time and sort of uh yeah you get like when when reality hits the idealized published world how how do you see LLMs and generative AI navigating ing that reality. >> That's an important question because I I do think that one of the things I sometimes get nervous about is how overwhelming all of this information could be. like we know that there's just an large millions of published papers out there and how are we supposed to synthesize all of that and really bring forward the information that's going to be most valuable at the time of making the decision. So part of it makes reminds me of the you know five rights of clinical decision-making. So really thinking about surfacing the right information to the right role. So the right person at the right time in the right modality and I think we can learn from some of those traditional informatics principles to help us with how we might want to see um these types of tools surfaced in the future. I there's a few different ways that we could envision it. So one is it could be cliniciandriven like if there was something that was more of a cliniciandriven chatbot interface that you know think Stanford medicine's chat ehr tool combined with something like open evidence or up-to-date where we could query something for a patient so we know the patient context but then also we have that generalizable um knowledge foundation backing it up. So we could say, you know, for this patient, can you help us um with a workup for fever of unknown origin? And it can pull from readily available algorithms, but rightsize it for our patient who might have certain risk factors that wouldn't apply to to the general population. So I think some of it is providing these tools to clinicians in a much easier way so that they can use them quickly. But then I do think that there is a role for us to being able to surface some important parts about a patient that we might otherwise miss and that's where we'll just have to be really thoughtful about how we would do that. So an example that I was chatting about with a colleague recently was one of the gaps that I think we have in in my clinic is we have tools to remind us that a patient is due for their next breast cancer screening test. So that's usually a mammogram and we have really nice tools that remind us if a patient's due for that and that's based on the current guidelines for all patients. So all female patients over the age of 40 are recommended to start breast cancer screening. But what gap do we have? So I think a gap there is what about patients where we've asked them about family history? They have strong family history. They might have other risk factors. They might actually be a good candidate for screening before 40. Or alternatively, they might need uh more advanced imaging modalities like they might be recommended to get breast MRIs alternating with mammograms. And right now, we don't have a way to prompt clinicians for that. And I think it's really tough for us to think about updating our current tools the way that they are because they're very rules-based. They do take a lot of effort to configure and then there's a lot of maintenance. But I think there's a role for some type of generative AI tool that could nudge in, you know, some sort of careful way, say, "Hey, this patient of yours, even though they're 38, it looks like they actually might be someone to consider screening for breast cancer because they're at really high risk based on something that was written in their note last year." And so it's it's being able to synthesize that and surface the information that might actually make an actionable change. And I think that's where partnering closely with clinicians will help because then a really able to make sure we're bringing forward the changes that might be actionable through that. [snorts] >> Nice. Yeah, it's it's exciting to think about capturing the sort of uh t tacet knowledge is what as I often refer to it as like that really that expertise that the clinician has that the model doesn't have any understanding of and can we get great feedback loops with generative AI and that sort of does paint a picture where maybe that's possible in the future through some of the ways that you just suggested. So that's pretty great. Um, another question from uh Babek uh Resavvi. Uh, do patients or physicians express any privacy or legal concerns about them being recorded? Uh, are the recordings uh kept long-term or they discarded? Uh, that's an interesting question. >> Great question. Um, yeah. So, as far as the recordings, that's something that came up early on before we we embarked on, you know, any long-term partnerships with an ambient AICE tool. And so, the recordings are shortterm. They're stored for the purpose of making sure that if um like if the note needs to be regenerated that that ability is retained for a short amount of time and then they are no longer kept. Um as far as clinicians and patients con potential concerns around this, I think just making sure that there's good awareness on all fronts is key. And so you know our clinicians know that this recording is taking place. They know how the tool works. They know that a transcript is generated from this. And then also we make sure that in our workflow we're notifying patients anytime this type of tool is being used. And so notifying patients reassuringly through what we've learned from our clinician surveys and um and interviews and then also from our patient surveys which we're still in the process of analyzing. While there definitely are some concerns that are raised, the vast majority feel like the way that it's currently being handled and the current workflows um are are, you know, okay with them and they're okay on the clinician side with using these tools because they're seeing the perceived benefits and then same with the patients. It seems like overall favorable acceptability and they want to see these tools being used again. Um, we do get questions asked about this though and so there are resources that we can direct clinicians to and also resources that we can direct our patients to that have questions about this because it is definitely important. >> Great. Great. So, uh, next question is from Carter Nakamoto. uh do you observe physicians editing the outputs or otherwise have a method to measure critical engagement and are there ways to think about monitoring or preventing automation bias in the SHC implementation? I think this is this is a great question like how how wrong are they and how are you measuring wrongness in some sense. Yeah, >> that's a great one. Um so yeah, there are ways to be able to measure edit distance. For example, you can take the output that was generated by the tool, compare that with the final note, and then see what the edit distances were and some other type similar types of tools that could be used to kind of compare and contrast. Um, you know, as far as thinking about monitoring those, it is important to think about that maybe on a risk like a risk level type of approach. And so, for example, the the one that we were the most careful to monitor that for was very early on when we had our pilot with the draft patient messages because that was the first time any of this type of generative AI content was put forth in front of clinicians. And so we did have a monitoring plan where for any match rates, I think it was over like 95%, those were actually manually reviewed by a team just to do some sort of, you know, secondary check, make sure that those messages that were sent all seemed like they were appropriate. And um I do think that that type of quality control process is important and I think in the future we might see dashboards or something like this just to help us with if we're starting to see trends towards more and more of just accept and send without edits. I think that just prompts more investigation because it might be that those are completely appropriate and that they were reviewed before they were sent. But you're right, I think that that just does prompt some sort of pause and let's just double check and make sure that we're not starting to get too used to sending these or we're not we're not starting to send these without reviewing. >> Great. I have a followup for for that idea. I was curious um you know you show the great plots about time savings and you know cutting down on pajama time and all these classic sort of like things that contribute to burnout and all these other facets. Do you have a sense of like what the for the folks who are spending more time or perhaps people aren't getting as much time savings as they expect. Is that related to model errors and do we imagine that will go down over time or like what are the kind of common time syncs for uh changes or or extra time spent on generative AI messages? >> Yep, that's a good that's a good um question. So I think one one caveat to the results that were presented is that we didn't compare by utilization. So we didn't necessar like we just looked at the change before and after of the entire pilot cohort and what we do know is that there is differential utilization of the tool by clinicians. So, for example, um you might use the recording in all visits, but then there might be a bit of a fallout in terms of which of those generated notes are actually making themselves in the clinician's workflow. Like sometimes they might just decide they're going to go ahead and use some pre-mplated notes. So I think one one one kind of step is to make sure we're having a better understanding of how clinicians are using it. Um are they using it for their notes? And then the edit distance would also be helpful to kind of lend some light into is it that they're taking time editing the note or are they actually taking time doing something completely different that's unrelated to the generative AI tool because I think that's still an open question. >> Sure. But to your point, I do know just in terms of some of the qualitative things that we've done and talking to clinicians, clinicians do say that sometimes it does take them more time to review than if they were to just, you know, um, use one of their pre-mplated phrases and then kind of proceed how they used to do before ambient AI. And I think that's where there's just some differences in terms of what are the potential benefits. Like we do hear that, okay, there's maybe more of that patient history in the note that maybe wasn't there before. That's, you know, one of the things that we've heard anecdotally. And so there's probably um some balancing measures here too and maybe some things that are happening that weren't happening before. But of course, editing requirements was one of the barriers that brought that were brought up. So hopefully we'll be able to have more personalization. I think one of the things that that I love that feedback like can you learn from my prior notes because then I won't have to edit as much because it'll kind of know how I like to document. We know clinicians have different preferences when it comes to documentation. So I do think future refinement hopefully can cut down on that editing requirement. [snorts] >> Nice. you you anticipated my second question followup was what do you think the role of personalization is in terms of facilitating trust and adoption and how does that impact how we think about validating and verifying that things are correct because it seems like like any tool right you want to configure it to be most optimal for you do you think that's like a absolute requirement for adoption in in ultimately or is it something that like people just learn to accept some sort of like more tried andrude uh process. >> It's a good question. I think I do think that the way that we interact with the chart is evolving in general and I also think notes have evolved. There's kind of an evolution of notes like there was the there were some regulatory changes in 2021 after which we no longer needed to put a bunch of stuff in the notes. So there was this campaign to kind of remove note bloat and get rid of some of the lists in there. Like there were just lists of medications and lists of patient medical history and labs, things that you could find in the chart that didn't necessarily need to be copied and pasted into the note. So it's interesting. We've already seen an evolution with notes. And so maybe in the future we'll just rethink how um like how how these notes are or kind of the purpose of the notes. I'll share an example of one way that I think it's actually like my workflow might might align better with ambient AI. And so one thing that I do is I'll often explain to the patient out loud like here's what I think is going on with your abdominal pain and I'll walk them through the list. So it's not the differential in the way that we might write a differential in the assessment and plan but I'm essentially giving the patient their differential and patient friendly terms and then telling them here's what I think we should do in terms of workup and next steps. And what I found is by doing that I now have to edit less of my assessment and plan because ambient AI does a good job capturing and synthesizing that part of the conversation. What it doesn't do yet is know what I'm thinking about the differential. You know if I come back to to my workstation after the visit and then I'm typing out my differential. So I have started to do a little bit more of that talking out loud during the visit. And so I think thinking about just workflow redesign, we might envision that our notes look different in the future. Maybe notes are more a hybrid of our interaction during the visit plus patient instructions plus some of the workup that's done and maybe more of that clinical reasoning happens, you know, during a visit so that patients leave with that information. >> Yeah, that's great. It's it's fun to think about. you did a really nice job of illustrating like your kind of like where Gen AI could help your workflow from pre-charting to sort of patient instructions and all that stuff. Yeah, it's fun to think about like how could generative AI fundamentally change sort of the patient clinician interaction and what gets emitted from that in terms of the record. I'm curious like we all think about this great you know future where everything's way more automated. Um, how do you think that impacts like you know is it a is it a net good thing that you know models will be mediating everything that happens between a patient and a clinician or do you think there is some you know skepticism of that kind of future like what's you know what's the yeah that's pure speculation but I'd be curious on your thoughts >> that's a great question I mean I do think that one of the things I love most about general internal medicine and primary care is some of those times where I sit down, craft a differential, um, pull up articles and try to, you know, think through like the mystery solving aspect of a case. And I wouldn't want to I definitely wouldn't want to lose that. And I also think it wouldn't be good for me in terms of continuing medical education if I lost that. I think being able to have to take those actions to find what the newest recommendations are. I think that's what keeps us up to date. That's what keeps us fresh. And so I hope that we'll see AI at minimum help with the tasks that we know are very much administrative. um you know, typing things out that are being said and typing out instructions that we're telling the patients and some of those things I mentioned, orders, level of service, things that can just happen behind the scenes. But you're right. I still think that some of the things that require more of that cognitive skill, clinical reasoning, formulating differential diagnosis, personalized treatment plans, like the nuance of, you know, you take one patient compared to a different patient. You might have vastly different treatment plans for them depending on their context, their history. And so I I do hope that we don't lose that. I think AI can help empower that because it's going to help us maybe learn faster or be able to pull that information up faster and stay up to date faster. But I think there is that separation. We need to make sure it's not thinking for us and and that we're still the ones that are doing the primary thinking for our patient just with support. So, um, I go to up to date all the time. Maybe I'll be going to some other resources in the future that that integrate more generative AI. >> Right. Right. All right. Well, we are uh at the conclusion of this really excellent Amy grand rounds. Thank you so much, Shrea, for presenting a really fascinating talk and taking the time to answer all of these questions. I wanted to thank the audience for joining us today. Uh a reminder to check the uh uh uh uh information on the screen and in the chat about claiming CME credit uh for this time. And uh I want to thank you again for being with us today and we will see you next time. So thank you so much. >> Thank you.