Title: The 229 Podcast: Inside Stanford Medicine’s AI Sandbox With Michael Pfeffer, MD
Channel: This Week Health
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=le5Hjx1dd4I
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

today on the 229 podcast. >> That's ultimately when you boil this whole thing down, that's the only thing that matters that the best decisions are being made for our patients in real time with the best evidence. [music] My name is Bill Russell. I'm a former health system CIO and creator of This Week Health, where our mission is to transform healthcare one connection at a time. Welcome to the 229 podcast where we continue the conversations happening at our events with the leaders who are shaping healthcare. Let's jump into today's conversation. All right, it's the 229 podcast where we continue the conversation that has started in our 229 rooms and today I'm joined by Michael Feffer, Dr. Michael Feffer, chief information and digital officer of Stanford Medicine. Mike, how's it going? It's great, Bill. It's always good to be here. Part of T29. How are you? >> Good. You know, I always joke with people that the best 10 minutes are the 10 minutes I don't record. Like the 10 minutes before we hit record and the 10 minutes after I hit record at the, you know, stop the recording at the end. And we just it it's we're going to talk a lot about AI. AI is one of those things that's been really interesting to me because if you thought like the internet never forgot anything, AI proved that the internet never forgot anything. like it scour into the deep corners, pulls things out. And I was just telling you that you know that the in my research AI keeps telling me, "Oh, you got to ask Mike about being a soccer referee, right?" >> And you're like, >> discussion about that. >> It's like soccer referee, where is it even getting that from? It's like, and then as we start talking about you're like, "Oh, yeah, you did use that." So, how just out of curiosity, how long were you a soccer referee? >> Oh, it was a long time ago. Pro I was probably a soccer referee for like six or seven years. >> Yeah, that was a long time ago. Much younger Mike. >> Yeah. >> When Mike can run up and down a soccer field for the whole weekend. >> Well, my my question for this was going to be you can't possibly still be doing this. Like you can't be like going out like leaving work and going over to referee soccer games. I can't imagine with all the stuff you have going on. don't anymore, but I do like watching soccer and or football, whatever you want to call it. I think it's such an amazing game and so I really I enjoyed it, you know, growing up making a little cash on the side. Funny because little little bit of geeky me back in the day like used some of that money to buy Microsoft Word like when it was in like a box with like floppy discs and >> I was all like excited because I could, >> you know, use this new word processor on my ancient computer. >> I miss those days. And to be honest with you, as a CIO, I really miss those days when things went to that like annual pricing instead of the box. It's really challenging. Not to be to stereotype things, but you and I, it's been a while since we've talked, and I'm going to focus really in on AI. It used to be, we used to apologize for talking about AI so much, but I think it has pretty much started to prove that it has serious practical application. In fact, that's been one of your topics for this year as I'm going back through Beckers and some other things that you've done. You talked about AI made practical and whatnot. You highlighted ambient listening, generative AI, computer vision as levers. I'm just curious from what you're seeing at Stanford. What's cross the line from promising to practical at this point? >> Yeah. I mean, of course, we have to talk about AI, Bill. I mean, that's like that's what everybody's talking about. But, you know, I like to think of it a little bit more that AI is one of the tools in our tool belt that we didn't have before in in the same way, right? We kind of always had some form of AI. We, you know, we were predicting things. We had rule-based artificial intelligence. So like it's not like this is you know AI and medicine haven't been good friends for a while but now we got like a super advanced version of AI capabilities that that is really exciting and changing the way we think about you know how we do things which is fun because we've always been trying to think about how do you do things differently in the informatics world and this is just such a great tool to rethink a lot of the ways we have done things in medicine But, you know, big picture is it's just accessible. Like, people get it. People get to play with it. People get to use it in different ways, learn about it, write fun prompts, like dig through the internet in ways they've, you know, never done before. Find find dirt on people you're going to interview. It's stuff like that. And it's just like it's available and that's what makes it most fun. So when you're having discussions about how to solve problems, what can we do better, whatever, this is starting to enter into people's, you know, thinking about, well, we could do it this way using AI. And that's what I think is most transformative here. >> I was reading some other stuff about, you know, the green button. You did a green button interview and talked about that a little bit. Just for the for those who don't know what the green button is, give us a little rundown of what the green button is. It's not the red button. It's not the blue button, it's the green button. >> Yeah. So, that this is a great question. I mean, that that was an idea that came about at Stanford a while ago before I was here to really think about how do you use dating and electronic health record to better determine what the next step of care is where there isn't, you know, necessarily evidence-based guidelines because there isn't evidence-based guidelines or randomized control trials for most decisions you have to make in medicine. And so that grew out of this idea of a green button which then led to a company spinning off and we use that here and a clinical informatics kind of consult service where you can ask a question and it will kind of you know relative to that it'll go and clinicians will go and actually review the data and bring back a prognost is what it's called. So that definitely is a uniquely Stanford thing which is you know out there and very exciting but it really was one of the first of its kind to leverage data in the electronic health record to make decisions on patients you're caring for at the time. So that was really cool and you can imagine how that's growing to be more and more automated, more and more integrated. We're actually doing pilots around that in our primary care clinics to bring evidence in real time to our clinicians. >> 10 years ago though, man, 10 years ago, I'm thinking about the technology that was available and now we have been on an AI journey for the better part of 30 plus some odd probably longer than that if I thought about it. But the but 10 years ago the technology around that had to be fairly I don't want to use the word primitive but early you know on in the process of being able to you know pull all that information together. It was almost like search and find and use NLP and I would assume that has progressed pretty rapidly over the last three years. >> Yeah for sure. I mean, you know, large language models are really good at summarization categorization generating new kind of text, pictures, whatever. So, when you're trying to look through medical records, which are, you know, huge amounts of unstructured data plus the structured data, this is these are just great tools to do that. And there's a lot to learn still, you know, on how these perform, but fundamentally this is just such a amazing set of tools to look into, you know, unstructured data in ways we haven't been able to before. Well, Epic in their I don't know what to call them. I always call them skits, whatever, you know, where they do the role playing kind of thing and here's what the future's going to look like. It looks a awful lot like this from 10 years ago, right? So they were highlighting what Cosmos would look like and how it would, you know, find the evidence and bring these things together and even look at different population sets and all that in real time. Now they were talking about that in the future and I think people sort of think this already exists within Epic. I mean, does it exist or are there still some barriers that are keeping us from just making it a green button that's there for everybody? >> Yeah, some of it does. it still has I think some ways to go but instead of having to do it more with older technologies now with you know large language model capabilities and models that they're building and everything that that you can harness the data in in at an entirely different level and you know I think part of the initial thinking around this was for particular disease state so diabetes hypertension and here's diabetics that look like this patient what medicine would be the best medicine for them. But you can now think about how you could expand that much quicker across many disease states. So I think I think that's what's really exciting about it. And then bringing the tools, you know, right to the clinicians in real time, I think is also, you know, really exciting about these. But a lot of exciting stuff happening. And I think we're going to continue to see these kinds of things iterate. >> I want to slice the population a little bit here with ambient. You know, everybody always asks about ambient and find the questions to be a little too generic. I the question I want to ask you, we're pretty far along in our ambient journey and I Stanford, we've talked about it for a while now. Which clinicians have benefited the most or the least from ambient listening? >> It's a great question. I I think it's less less about, you know, groups of clinicians and more about the individual clinician and how they use the system. You know, lots of clinicians love this. It's really good for an initial consult or initial H&MP. You know, you're seeing the patient for the first time where it has a little more I think room to grow is around well follow-up visits where you already have a note, you already have information about the patient. How do you you don't just want to necessarily start from scratch. And you know, for highly specialized clinicians, they've gotten some of them have gotten really good with the templates that they've built uh over the years. And so it then do you really need necessarily ambient scribes? So it's interesting to see I think it varies across the board. >> It really is an individual like how they practice and how they have used the technology before. And I mean that's because I've heard a lot of systems as we travel around the country I'll ask people and they'll say oh I mean everyone touts like we're doing AI we're doing ambient scribes. I'm like okay everybody's doing ambient scribes. So, you know, what percentage are you at? And there seems to be this like top end barrier of about 60 to 70%, like people are sort of and the 30% is almost a case of they don't want it like I'm faster with my keystrokes and whatever or it's just not practical for the way I practice. >> Absolutely. And I think that's, you know, one of the nice things about it. It's an option, right? It's another tool that clinicians can use, you know, take care of patients. And if it works really well, great. If it doesn't work well in that particular practice, great. You don't have to use it. In fact, it may work well for certain kinds of patients that you're going to use it for and other kinds of patients you don't use it for. And I think that level of flexibility is really important. That real personalized experience. And you can begin to customize how these things work. So, how do you like it to draft or not? Do you like bullets? Do you like it by problem? How do you like these things? So as you get more and more customized and these tools continue to grow in capabilities I think you'll see more and more of that ceiling increase and it may not again it may be 90% of clinicians are using it but for 70% of visits right I mean so you know you'll have to we'll have to see where this all goes but remember this is like version one I mean we've been on you know many tools have been version one for like 20 years right >> this is not version one what I rolled Now back in 2012 that was version one and that was a little painful >> right so this is version one of you know ambient scribes version you know big version two is going to be amazing big version three you know it's just going to get better and better and you can imagine that things are going to be integrated into that uh ambient and voice workflow and then add video to that you know it's going to come together in a really amazing way >> I I I do want to talk to you about video. I got in trouble recently at one of the as you've seen my trouble. >> Well, you see I don't believe that. >> Well, one of the one of the one of the well actually multiple health systems were sort of touting, hey, we're doing ambient listening, computer vision, AI models in the patient room. And when I pushed them on their use cases, I'm like, you could do that with Zoom. Like, why did you buy an AI platform for that? It was like, well, you know, we haven't implemented any AI sort of around that. I want to let's start with this and that's as you would imagine that got me in trouble because you're kind of touting you know we have this AI platform but I'm like all you really have is a computer and a and a microphone in a room and a TV that's connected to a TV and let's call that version five of where we're going with this. How does the experience with ambient listening inform what the future of the uh the patient room looks like with cameras, voice, ambient? I mean, have you learned anything in terms of the adoption, the use with just the standard ambient listening that's going to inform how we progress with the more sophisticated room of the future, if you will? >> Yeah, they definitely go together, right? I think the room of the future is going to have, you know, computer vision and ambient voice kind of interacting together in a way. And it's it's going to be for the clinicians and staff that, you know, work in the room and the patient and the family and the whole experience. It's all going to ultimately come together in some way. And you know, I would say that as we think about all these different technologies, we really want to get back to like what problem are we trying to solve with what outcome, right? Because ultimately that's what's most important. You could put algorithms in everywhere, but if it's not really solving a particular problem or moving the needle on an outcome that's really important, then you know what are you really doing? And I think that's what we've really tried to do here at Stanford is like measure that, understand from the beginning like this is what we're trying to solve and here's the outcome we're trying to move and so let's make sure we actually do that. And sometimes it doesn't even involve AI, right? I mean, so I would just, you know, as I think about all of these things, I want to make sure that we're using the right tools and the right solutions to fix the problems and move the [clears throat] outcomes that we want. And I think that really being the north star, I think you'll drive value out of all of these technologies. >> That phrase uniquely Stanford has come up a bunch in the research of that comes out of your mouth a fair amount. Uniquely Stanford. But I mean what does that mean to be uniquely Stanford? Well, I mean, there's an incredible culture here of innovation and it it really permeates everything from, you know, obviously Stanford University to the school of medicine to all of our health system enterprise adult and children's and that it's just such a nice like amazing culture and it's hard to explain until you kind of feel it and live it, but it it really allows us to kind of think big and do things that hopefully again solve problems. s move outcomes in the right direction and then can be you know taken and disseminated across the world. That's kind of the uniquely standard >> think big is a well actually that's a gift because I know a lot of CIOS that are struggling to get their organizations to think big and you don't have to worry about thinking big but that's a double-edged sword too right so it's like hey you know we're doing research we need access to this this this and this and we've we I don't want to go too far into this but we've talked about the sandbox that you guys had to develop to sort of meet the needs of researchers. I I wouldn't mind you talking about it a little bit because I what I find is as I'm out there I reference this a lot because it's a it's unique maybe not specifically to Stanford but it's very rare within healthcare to have this kind of sandbox environment. I'd love for you to talk about it a little bit. >> Yeah. Well, you know, we there's a lot of talk about learning health systems and I think this is a really great example of one of the ways you can be a learning health system. And so early on in the launch of large language models, we decided that we were going to kind of create a place for everyone in Stamford Medicine to go that's secure and has a couple different models to choose from to start to play and learn and see how these things work. And we called it secure GPT. That creative name, right? >> That's so creative. >> It's very we put Stanford in front of it. So like you know it got more creative but secure GPT and incredible work by the team. It was like we sat down and talked about this and they were like my CTO Christian Limark who's amazing is like well we can probably do this in six months and I'm like how about six weeks and he's like okay. And six weeks later we had it and since then we we now have like over 18 models in it. But what's really cool about it is we get to learn what people are using it for. And so again using models we can look at the prompts anonymously and say okay let's categorize it into different things and see what people are doing and learned a lot about then okay well what kind of automations do we want to build for the organization based on what we learned in the portal and then we also have APIs into the secure portal so researchers can use it to do things and uh one of my favorite examples is we have this lab that was recording these very complex Lex patient uh interactions. They're doing really amazing research mental health space and the question was well could we somehow use secure TPT to help us and we added an audio tool in there. So what they did was they recorded it. They recorded these conversations which took them hours and hours to transcribe and summarize and they just uploaded the you know with the voice file and it transcribed it in a beautiful way and summarized and they were able to >> and it's just like that kind of like excitement of oh my god this is amazing like it's saving me so much time. So we learned from what was going on and that in combination with you know the research enterprise in the school of medicine and our chief data scientist Nick Sha really came to say well let's really bring the clinical record together with the large language models to do some of the things that people were doing in the secure DPT in a in an easier way right you don't have to move things around it's just right there and that borum chat eh chart >> and those are just examples but we keep learning from this. We keep learning from what people are doing how they're thinking and then can develop kind of AI based automations and tools and products that match those needs. I >> is chat ehr in s still in sort of a pilot phase or is that rolled out? >> It is live. Yeah. No fully. We did pilot it for some time because it's important that we learned that it works and can scale. But we know it's been live since September to all of our physicians, residents, and a number one question people want to ask is how do you make sure it's accurate? Right? So, it's going through this massive amounts of unstructured data and it's coming back with insights, I assume, based on the medical record. How do you I mean that's obviously why it was in pilot for so long is to right >> try to do that. How did you get past that? I mean how did you figure that out? >> Yeah. Well, a lot of work and iteration and monitoring of the system and you know obviously we limit it to this just that one patient's record in a very secure way. So first just you know you have to be taking care of that patient in the chart just like all of our typical security and privacy measures to get access to that you know the chatty HR tab which then you can ask questions about the patient record but of course it's just the data from the patient that it's allowed to return and so that significantly reduces you know the hallucinations and that but we continue to monitor it through using models to monitor it. We have a a whole framework called Medhelm which you can Google and there's some really interesting things about that to help really understand how the large language models are performing and we get feedback. So with every response you can give a thumbs up or thumbs down and so we iterate on that >> and it's care everywhere. It's pulling from the various HIVs anything that's out there with regard to this patient. >> Yep. Yep. And so it's been really amazing to see this in action and have people just love it and find things that they maybe would have found. Saves time. You can do summarization. You can ask questions of trendings, you know, there, you know, just what a large language model would. >> Yeah. It could find out that you're a soccer referee and maybe, you know, it would explain some injury that you have. I have no idea >> if it's in the record, but um for sure. And so it's been really exciting. Of course, we're iterating on what it can do. But the other piece of it, which I think is equally as exciting as the user interface in the EHR is the ability to then run very sophisticated analytics, you know, so instead of just rules-based, you can have a huge set of criteria, right? And run that against the electronic health record data in real time and then produce out output that you can then put back into the workflow. So an example of that is we have a a wing of a hospital that's staffed by us nearby and academic medical centers very full. So we want to make sure patients can get beds in a timely manner and so we can actually send patients from our emergency room here in Palo Alto over to this other wing in Redwood City. And so how do you know which patients are eligible for that transfer? Well, you have to meet a whole set of criteria because we don't do all of the things that we do on the main campus there, which is, you know, how lots of health systems work. >> And so we we took that large criteria and we can run it against every patient in the emergency department and then flag the ones that meet the criteria instead of having people having to do manual chart review to find those patients. So imagine trying to do that before. You couldn't, >> right? Now you can. And so imagine all of those kinds of automations that you can do in real time using very complex sets of criteria against you know patients in the electronic health record in real time. >> I don't know how relevant of question this is for our audience but it is for me. So I'm curious the have you learned anything about the models like which ones get used the most and for what tasks and those kinds of things? >> We sure do. And in Medhelm actually it shows you like how models perform for different healthcare tasks and it's really interesting to see how different models perform in different ways but yes I mean people are using different models for different things and and they do perform in different ways. So that is a very important you know thing for people to understand like not every model is the same right they all kind of perform different tasks in different ways some a lot better than others >> and there's no one model that you would say yeah just use this model and you'll get I mean there there are just like people there's things that people specialize in that they're really good at >> and the prompting for that model so it's like a combination of couple different things there to get to where you need to And so yeah, it's really interesting. I mean, you know, you have different models to choose from and then you can set, you know, temperature on those models, then you can prompt them in different ways. And so you there's a lot of creativity that that actually can occur in this space, which I think is really exciting. It does require training. So part of what you know you have to do to get access to shadowy HR is you have to take a training course which talks about how it works and what's its limitations and what how to prompt and etc. So part of what's exciting about the tool is that people actually also learn how to use these models. Yeah. >> So that's also I think a lot of fun. >> You're still practicing or has anything changed there? >> Still practicing. >> All right. I want the user perspective now, not the strategic CIO guy that shows up on the show. From a user perspective is, you know, what what technology or tool >> has changed your shift? >> Chatty HR. >> Really? You're using it and you're practicing? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, definitely if you're picking up a set of 20 patients on service, you can ask questions of each of the chart and really get to know the patients really well. um as opposed to trying to read, you know, hundreds of notes or whatever. If you're, you know, admitting a patient for the first time, it's really helpful to dive into the record and make sure you pick up all the details that you need. So, yeah, Chatty HR has been really gamechanging, discharge summary writing. It'll summarize the hospital course better than I've ever seen anybody do it. So, that's kind of exciting. And so, I think that's been really fun. And you know, I think the evidence-based tools now that are powered by large language models where you can ask questions and it gives you back the evidence on how to take care of a patient I think is really big game changing as well. So I kind of teach the residents now and it's always in the past it's always been like how much can you memorize and I think we're all shifting to this idea that you obviously need to have a knowledge base as a physician. That's undeniable. You can't just be, you know, going to a large language model asking for things. But there are so many nuances and new evidence generated and all of these things that using these technologies which provide, you know, evidence quickly is something that I'm a huge advocate for to make sure we're doing the right thing every time for every patient because that's ultimately when you boil this whole thing down, that's the only thing that matters that the best decisions are being made for our patients in real time with the best evidence. We're having conversations with a lot of other health systems. They're a little skittish on on AI in the clinical setting. Now, we've talked a lot about how you're mitigating those risks and whatnot, but you had the resources of Stanford and a lot don't. So, they're going to rely heavily on partners and vendors. We're seeing AI obviously ambient listening and I think the imaging space is another one that we're seeing a lot but everyone seems to be bullish in the area of things like the call center service desk revenue cycle. I'm wondering if you're seeing and experiencing those same opportunities and how you're approaching those. >> Yeah, absolutely. I mean, you know, automation of our support services, a huge opportunity. So, we're doing a lot of work on revenue cycle. We have a great partnership with our chief patient experience officer around the call centers and we're looking at new omni channel capabilities obviously with AI agents that can do some of the work. And I think part of it is also like how can we free up humans so that when humans need to talk to humans they can. I mean it's not getting rid of that. It's actually enhancing that capability and moving all the other things that really could be automated and handled with AI and agentic AI to where that needs to be. So absolutely looking at all of those areas and I think that's where you'll see a lot of value from AI and healthcare initially because it's so ripe now the big question is in my mind is are we going to automate the same processes we have today or are we going to be able to do new things right and sure we could automate prior authorizations and the insurance company will automate rejections of prior authorizations or approvals of prior authorizations and this goes back and forth and back and forth. But if you kind of go back to what's the purpose of a prior authorization, I guess I mean I mean I biased as a physician. I think they're just such a huge administrative burden for not much value, but anyway, but let's assume they have some value, okay? That it's really about doing the right thing for the patient at the right time. So we're back to this idea of precision medicine, precision health. How best to do that? provide evidence in real time, make sure we're ordering the right scan at the right time. You know, all of these things can be enabled by, you know, AI based decision support. If you remember like few years ago like there was this whole big push to put radiology decision support that was being mandated by the government and you had a you know you had a order and explain why and all of these things and that ended up like disappearing which I think in hindsight was pretty obvious because it's too hard to do that with rules-based decision support right it's too hard but with AI and the ability to really move this in the right direction I think there's It's not like blocking you, but it's just now kind of helping you synthesize. Well, what is the best imaging to order? Is it that MRI or is it that CT scan? Right? And so, I think we're going to see more if we kind of focus on that instead of how do we automate prior authorizations, we're going to actually make a difference for patients because I'm going to keep going back to that because that's what it's all about, >> right? It's the most important thing is that the right test is ordered for the patient at the right time. Not delayed, not you know we got to get this test first before we can do but this is the right test based on the evidence and give it the first time. We get there then you don't need prior authorizations. There are problems we're going to be able to solve within the four walls of the health system. I mean not that those are easy, they're easier and then there's things that cross the boundary. payers provide, you know, payer provider, those kinds of things. To a certain extent, you can influence that depending on, you know, the scale of your health system and the market and those kind of things. And some of that's just going to is going to require some redoing of of of the models. It's I one of the people I follow is Aaron Levy from Box CEO. >> Oh, he's great. >> He writes a lot of really thoughtprovoking things. And one of one of the things he's really keen on talking about now is people are all worried about, hey, we're going to, you know, we're going to replace all these jobs. And he's like, he goes, there are absolutely some jobs that will not exist a couple years from now. However, he goes, we will be doing things with this technology that we never did before. like, hey, we're going to go through all the images we've done for the last 10 years and we're going to do a secondary read on all those images looking for something specific, which now is like just fire up the computers and away you go. Whereas before it would have been, well, we couldn't possibly hire all the people to do those kind of things. And he has he's just keeps putting these use cases out there where people are going now obviously box is a storage thing. He's like people are scanning all these files that they never had enough manpower to do. Now they have them. It's like a hundred interns to just get, you know, go do this work. It gives us a chance to rethink things, but within the four walls, it's easier to rethink things. As you get out, that's where we really have to exercise new muscles of it's a policy, it's a politics, it's people, it's it's skills. You know, for a lot of CIOS, we were just learning those skills within the four walls of the health system. Now we're thinking across the community and potentially across the nation with >> Yeah, >> I'm optimistic. I really am. And you know, I think we kind of have to be because the these things have we have to change. Healthc care is, you know, expensive. It's challenging. Being a patient is not easy. And I really believe that people go into healthcare because they want to help people live their full lives. Y so ultimately this stuff is going to come together and and I would say informatics over the last 20 years has always had that mission but has been hampered by not having the technology to handle the kinds of data sets that medicine is based on. Back in the day, I when we put in the electronic health record, there was a way to configure it so you can click a whole bunch of buttons to generate the history and physical and all this stuff. And I was just completely against it. And my thinking was like it doesn't tell the patient's story at all. It's just a bunch of pre-generated text that you lost the whole kind of, you know, feeling about the encounter and what the patient's trying to tell you. And so, we didn't implement that. We stuck with like old school dictation or you could type or create a template or whatever. And I was always dreaming of the time where the technology would capture the patient's story for you. and we're here, right? It we never got discreet documented notes by pushing a whole bunch of buttons. It never happened because clinicians wanted the patient's story. And man, reading notes that were pre-generated by like just clicking boxes were awful to read. You couldn't even remember because they all looked the same. So now here we are with the technology available to capture the patient's story in the patient's words in a way more accurate way than probably we've ever done in the past. That's just incredibly exciting. And so imagine five years from now all of those notes that have been generated by ambient with the patient's story at the center with much more accurate information. What are we going to learn from those notes? >> Right? >> That's really exciting to me as well. So, you know, I just think we're going to have to that that's why I'm very optimistic about this because I think ultimately we're all going to come together both inside the health systems, obviously a lot of work going on there, but across health systems and payers because it's the right thing to do and and now we have the tools to kind of do that. So, >> I should end here, but I'm not going to. Like, a good podcaster would end right here because that was such a great close and I'm going to go into a really unsexy area, but I want to just brainstorm a little bit with you on plumbing. So, there's an awful lot of people struggling out there with AI from a plumbing standpoint. So, we talked about data. So, you have fairly clean data that you're working with. You talked about you talked about a sandbox of models. So you have privacy, security of [clears throat] the data. You talked about monitoring of the use of those models. You probably had governance over the selection of those models, I would imagine, as well. But what else am I missing here? I'm trying to piece this together for somebody who's sitting there going, "Okay, how did they >> Well, I I mean, look, are we perfect here?" No. I mean, we're still learning how to think about all of this stuff uh in a scalable way. We foundationally have something we call rail responsible AIO life cycle which is really built into our standard processes around project management and how we manage applications etc. And we're learning how to continue to refine that and make that even better and faster streamlined. We use uh firm assessment. We I think we probably talked about this in a prior podcast to help assess for AI. you know what are the things that we need to understand about the project the models the workflows the outcomes to measure etc so all of our AI goes through that but we're learning I mean I think there's many different philosophies around all of this I would say most if not all health systems have some kind of AI governance now that's pretty standard I think a lot of organizations have built it into their processes and the flag things that have AI so determining risk levels and how to do this but you know our philosophy is really it's not one team it's not its own thing it's something that everyone in IT needs to think about know own be part of and it's a tool that can be leveraged at the right time again going back to solving the problem right I mean not every problem needs AI and the flip is entirely true AI going to look for problems isn't the right way to do it either so uh it's really kind of bringing all of that together And we continue to learn, we continue to iterate. And yeah, I don't think there's like any magic bullet, but having a philosophy kind of sticking to it, having governance, I think is really key. >> Last item. So Chris Longhurst has gone the doctor, technology, CEO [snorts] route. Do you think we're going to see that more or I mean, no better person to lead Seattle Children's than >> Yeah. I'm so excited for Chris. I mean, they couldn't have chose a better person in my opinion. Yeah. >> And I'm not in any way biased at all because he as a CIO, but yeah, I mean, how could you not separate out technology and healthcare now? It's impossible. And when you think about the future, everything you're going to do is going to involve technology in some way. And so, yeah, I think that's really exciting. Will we see more following Chris Longhurst footsteps? I hope so. But Chris is, you know, a unique guy. He trained at Stanford, so maybe he's uniquely Chris. I don't know. But I'm super >> He is uniquely Chris. That's That is truth. >> I'm I'm just super excited for what he's going to do at Seattle Children's. They're very lucky to have him. And yeah, super exciting. >> Mike, I want to thank you for coming on the show and thank you for being a part of the 229 project. >> My pleasure, Bill. It's always so much fun to talk to you. Never know what I'm going to get asked, which is fun as well, but it's an exciting time. And you know, I love how you're bringing different viewpoints and ideas to the health IT community so we can all grow together because, you know, it really is just about, you know, the patient and how do we and making people's lives healthier. And I think again, I'll go back to being optimistic like I think we're going to be able to continue to move the needle. We didn't even talk about what's possible in research, in medical research >> and discovery. >> All right. Well, that te's up our next conversation. >> Yeah. I mean, that's like incredibly exciting. Clinical trials and what all the work that's going on in cancer and, you know, using AI for protein discovery, drug discovery, the list goes on and on. I mean, how that's just remarkable and it's going to completely shape how healthc care is delivered in the next three to five years easily. >> Yeah, absolutely. Thanks again, Mike. Appreciate it. >> All right. Thanks, Bill. Thanks for listening to the 229 podcast. The best conversations don't end when the event does. They continue here with our community of healthcare leaders. Join us by subscribing at thisweek.com/subscribe. If you have a conversation that's too good not to share, reach out. Also, check out our events on the 229pro.com website. Share this episode with a peer. It's how we grow our network, increase our collective knowledge, and transform healthcare together. Thanks for listening. That's all for now. [music] >> [music]