Title: The future of AI in medicine and what it means for physicians and practices with Tom Lawry
Channel: American Medical Association (AMA)
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQN3AABMIzU
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

Unger: Hello and welcome to the
AMA Update video and podcast. Artificial intelligence
or AI, continues to be one of the hottest
topics in health care. And today, we're continuing that
conversation with a leading AI transformation advisor to
health and medical leaders around the world, Tom Lawry. Tom is the managing director
of Second Century Tech, bestselling author
of Hacking Health and the former national director
for artificial intelligence at Microsoft, joining
us from Seattle. I'm Todd Unger, AMA's chief
experience officer in Chicago. Tom, we're so glad to have you. Welcome. Lawry: Hey, it's
great to be with you. Thanks for having me. Unger: Well, since
the launch of ChatGPT, so much of the conversation
around AI in health care has focused on one aspect and
that's been generative AI. But the term AI, obviously,
encompasses so much more than that. I'm a big fan of the definition
that you used when you visited the AMA a couple of months ago. And I thought it would just
make sense for the audience out there if they heard
how you think about it. What do you mean when
you talk about AI? Lawry: Well, great question. Generative AI is
the latest flavor of many flavors of what's known
as artificial intelligence. So I like keeping things simple. So to your point, let's
assume AI is really relating to IT
systems, the sense, comprehend, act and learn. Probably, more importantly,
it's intelligence demonstrated by software with the
ability to depict or mimic human brain functions. And I want to emphasize
mimic human brain functions, not replace. Unger: So in your book,
you talk about how AI can solve some of the biggest
problems in health care, which is very good news because
we do need that help. I'd like to focus on a couple
of the most pressing problems for physicians,
starting with obstacles like prior authorization
and paperwork, in general. How can AI lessen the
administrative burdens on physicians? And when is that
going to be a reality? Lawry: Well, I think the
answer is it's starting now. It's only, hopefully,
going to get better. But to your point, for every
physician that's listening, what was the intrinsic reason
you went to medical school? It probably wasn't to become
a data entry clerk, which is what many physicians I talk
to feel like we've turned them into. So the ability to take
those highly repetitive, low-value activities
and automate it through the use of AI
is one of the key areas that we all should
be focusing on. There are the good
examples now for what's known as ambient
intelligence, where, as a physician is
doing a consult, instead of going to the EMR
and the corner of that room and hunting and pecking, of
having natural conversations and in the background ambient
intelligence is recording all of that, is putting together
those triage notes to allow you, essentially, to spend
more time being a doctor and less time being
a data entry clerk. So we're already seeing it. It's only going to get better. Unger: Well, speaking of that,
let's talk about another one of the big concerns
for physicians, not unrelated to what
we just talked about, and that is physician burnout. So they're already
asked to do so much, so fast and for so many people. And unlike when we think
about EHRs, how do we ensure that AI is used to
reduce physicians' burnout and not just increase
their workload? Lawry: Well, once again,
AI as a tool and a vehicle, if properly used,
gives us the ability to augment the skills and
the work of physicians. So I would address
that quickly by saying there are two burdens
that AI, done correctly, will help address. The first is what we've
already talked about, which is the administrivia. A study by Stanford
shows many physicians spend more time in the EMR
than they do seeing patients. That's just not right. A colleague of mine,
Dr. Eric Topol, who's the head of Scripps
Research, very popular author himself, coined the term
"keyboard liberation". I'm here to say AI can help
all physicians with keyboard liberation. We should start the keyboard
liberation league today. The second thing, quickly,
that I don't think is getting the kind of
attention it should is what I call
cognitive burden that is being placed on physicians
by the exponential growth of medical data. So a newly trained
physician in 1950 would go their entire practice
before medical knowledge doubled. Today, it's doubling
every 72 days. So even the best,
smartest physicians are having a hard time keeping
up with all that information to help them make
the right decisions. AI has great opportunity when it
comes to helping tame that data explosion. Unger: First off,
#keyboardliberation. Write that down. Second, to your point,
in terms of the exploding knowledge about
medical information, it's also applying to AI itself. The pace of change with
this particular technology is just incredible. How does a physician, any
practice, no matter what the size, keep up with this? Lawry: Well, it's
a great question and probably the
longer answer is not something we're going
to do in this podcast. But essentially,
the world normally works, particularly
health and medicine, on what economists
call linear change in growth, which is incremental
change produced by technology. Then adoption takes
place and the little gaps between technology and adoption
and adoption and regulatory. We're in a point where
economists also talk about exponential growth curve. So the biggest challenge
for everyone right now is not what the
technology can do, but it's the velocity of
change that it's driving. So I think any practice,
any health care organization is being challenged right
now because everything that is set up for
leadership for management is based on that linear growth. And exponential growth
creates that hockey stick when it comes to change. So it brings us down to-- if we're going to be in this
for a while, which I believe we are, everyone has to rethink
how they manage, how they lead, how they practice. Unger: On that
subject, your book also talks about the
qualities that leaders have to help their
organizations adapt and thrive in this big revolution
in health care. What do you think some of those
key qualities of AI leaders are going to look like? Lawry: Well, I think, first
of all, many of the leadership qualities that have gotten
leaders to where they are today remain intact, remain important. But when you look at
the changes being driven by digital and
transformation, I believe there are new set of
skills that are desperately going to be needed. And it's not just my opinion. But research by McKinsey and
others like Gartner are saying, leaders with the
skills they've been successful with in the
past will not necessarily be successful in the new
world of digital and AI. And so we're looking at
things like new hard skills, like leaders needing
to know AI, which is not to say they need
to know how to code it. But they at least need
to understand what it is and what it can do when it comes
to the practice of medicine. There are also a
lot of other things, such as soft skills, when
it comes to design thinking. More than anything, the
thing I coach leaders on is the importance of
thinking differently. And a lot of that has
to do with the number one impediment I see when
I'm advising big health care organizations about driving
value at scale with AI is basically the need to
digitally upskill everyone in the organization,
starting with leadership. Unger: That's no
small challenge. How do you do that? Lawry: Well, it starts
with leadership. It starts with
the acknowledgment that the way you're
going to manage and lead in the world of AI is
going to be different. And there's a whole new
science emerging around things like decisions about
decisions, where, in the past, every decision in the
health care organization was made by a human and a brain. And there are many
of those things that are being automated. So there are some things,
like the practice of medicine, dealing with patients, where
humans, physicians, have to be in the loop. But there are many other
things we can automate and the humans don't necessarily
have to be in the loop. But it's that whole
science around decisions about decisions that leaders
must understand and then bring forward systems
actually apply that in the practice of medicine
and in the practice of running these big health organizations. Unger: So my final question-- I'd like to look ahead a
bit and imagine that it's 10 years in the future, 2033. In what way do you think that
health care will have changed the most as a result of AI? Lawry: Well, with any luck
and done right, while there's so much chatter today about
the threats and the issues, and even the existential
threat to humankind, I believe the narrative is going
to be very different in health care done right. I believe we have the ability
to create a health renaissance, where all of the issues
we just talked about, when it comes to the things
we burdened physicians with, many of those things
are going to go away or be dramatically reduced to
allow physicians to practice at the highest level, not
just for the quality of care but help them
intrinsically pursue the reasons they became
physicians in the first place. I see the ability for us
to go so much farther when it comes to this relationship
with consumers, including consumers having a big play in
the management of their health in collaboration
with physicians. Beyond that, I see
things that are already happening in other
parts of the world where we have the ability to
truly take this thing called population health and deliver
much greater measurable value at scale by the monitoring
and management of things like chronic
conditions, courtesy of AI coming in behind
physicians and support of what they do. Unger: Well, Tom,
I'm going to put that into our little time capsule. And then I'm going
to see you in 2033. Lawry: Add me back-- Unger: We'll see how-- Lawry: --in 10 years, Todd. Unger: --that goes. Lawry: Yes. Unger: Thank you so
much for joining us. It really is a pleasure
to talk to you. AI isn't the only thing
driving change in health care. And along with what we talked
about earlier with Tom, we are leading the
charge to address those burdens, like prior
authorization, burnout and more as part of
the AMA Recovery Plan for America's Physicians. You can learn all about our
latest wins and our efforts at ama-assn.org/recovery. We'll be back soon with
another AMA Update. In the meantime, you can find
all our videos and podcasts at ama-assn.org/podcasts. Thanks for joining us today. Please take care. [MUSIC PLAYING]