Title: NHS bosses say unapproved AI software should not be used to record patients
Channel: Sky News
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OZe8i6V89yQ
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

Britain will be one of the great AI superpowers. AI. AI. AI. AI. We will make sure that this technology is safe. A revolution at speed. AI. The key to NHS reforms. But if there were safety warnings, would they be properly heeded? This is what the future of healthcare looks like. Doctor patient meetings transcribed and analyzed by AI. All I've got to do here is click on this mic and that'll bring us this screen. Greets me by saying hello Dr. Meta. I'll start the conversation. Go back to listen to what the patient's saying. Once I'm done, I'll pause the recording and that'll be recorded into the medical records. What you just saw is an approved version of ambient voice technology, AVT. Remember that phrase. and thousands of GPS are already putting it into action with the government's encouragement. I spend 30% of my week doing paperwork. Um so I think once I've explained all of those features of what we're doing, patients are extremely um reassured. In April, NHS England wrote to doctors to sell the benefits of ABT and set out minimum national standards. But just weeks later, NHS England bosses sent another letter, this time warning of a proliferation of problems. It says, "We are now aware of a number of AVT solutions which despite being non-compliant, are still being widely used in clinical practice. Several AVT suppliers are approaching NHS organizations. Many of these vendors have not complied with basic NHS governance standards. proceeding with non-compliant solutions risks clinical safety, data protection breaches, and financial exposure. I've heard anecdotally down the pub, genuinely down the pub, uh that um some clinicians are getting ahead of the game and are already using ambient AI to kind of record notes and things even where their practice or their trust are not yet haven't yet caught up with them. There is huge amounts of money to be made from the technological arms race here, but are hundreds of individual NHS bodies really able to sift out the sharks? So, you're making it sound like this letter is actually quite a big deal. Is that what you think? Yeah, I think this letter is a really significant moment. My own view is that the government should help in terms of the procurement decisions that trusts make as we do with other forms of technology that we use in medicine. Uh which ones are safe and which ones can be bought. You're arguing the government should do a bit more than I think the government should be will need to do a bit more to guide the NHS in the best way to use this. That actually makes it sound like in the short term it could be quite dangerous. Well, I think what you've seen with ambient voice technology is that kind of let a thousand flowers bloom approach has got its limits. Next week, the government will say AI is needed to save the NHS, but recording consultations and then using AI is already a big leap to make. Sam Coat, Sky News, Westminster.