Title: Ambient AI in Pediatrics
Channel: Stanford Department of Pediatrics
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QDwydf40uto
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

Okay, I think we're we're five after the hour. We can go ahead and get started and those of I think some people will trickle in. Um, welcome. Uh, today we're going to be talking a little bit about ambient AI scribes and pediatrics. Uh, here we go. Uh, I'm Lindsay Stevens. I am faculty at Stamford and the chair of our our pediatric digital health health task force. And I'm joined by several of my colleagues from Stanford and other institutions. We've got Keith Morse, Bethl Messo, Chaan Saribu, and Namisha Chilakuri with us. And we're going to be having a great conversation. Uh just housekeeping, none of us have business relationships with any ambient scribe companies and wanted to tell you a little bit about where this all started. So, we are a group of like-minded pediatric informaticists. uh who have an interest in making sure that digital health tools are designed with children and families in mind. And we've led a couple workshops within the last year on pediatric AI and ambient scribes through the American Medical Informatics Association conferences and brought together different experts to really talk about this and come up with some points for for further development and use of this technology going forward. So we wanted to share that with all of you. Today we're our main learning objectives. We're going to be working to appraise the implementation efforts of ambient listening in pediatric settings. We're going to talk about the evaluation of the unique pediatric specific ethical regulatory clinical technical, and implementation challenges with this technology and identify some of the key considerations of using this in pediatric settings. So, let's just quickly start with that's handing. Hold on just a second. There we go. Start with some basics. So, what is an ambient aiscribe? Many of those on the call have probably used them or familiar with them, but really it's a tool that records the clinical encounter and uses artificial intelligence to generate clinical notes for healthcare providers. And you can see on the little screen here, the parent is having a conversation with the clinician and telling them about their daughter who's not feeling well. And it's recording the conversation and then from that takes it and puts it and develops a structured clinical note for the use from the clinician and for uh clinical communication in the healthcare setting. So with that, I'm just going to go through a quick case uh so that you can be thinking about some of these aspects as we move through our conversation today with the panelists. Uh our panelists are going to kind of each talk about some different aspects uh and considerations for the use of ambient technology and then we'll have some time for question and answers at the end of our session. So feel free to put anything in the Q&A session and um we'll be answering those um a little bit later. So, uh, Dr. James is a pediatric gastronurologist who wants help streamlining her documentation so that she can focus more on her patients. She's seeing Carlos, a 15-year-old male with possible IBD in her clinic. He's accompanied by his mother, Brenda, who speaks Spanish as her primary language. In the clinic room, there's also an interpreter, Diego. The ambient AI scribe needs to digest the conversation between Dr. James, Carlos, Brenda, and Diego, and create a coherent note. Since Carlos speaks English, he will respond to Dr. James directly. Anything that Brenda says will be interpreted by Diego and he will relay the other conversation points back to Brenda. Since Carlos is a teenager, Dr. James excuses Brenda to talk to Carlos privately. Carlos mentions that he is in a samesex relationship, but his mother does not know and he wants to keep that confidential. So, think about that a little bit as we're moving through our conversation today. I'm going to pass it off to Iden to talk a little bit about the clinical impact of these tools. >> Awesome. Thank you, Lindsay. Um, so many of you will recognize this iconic drawing on the right side of the screen, which features a seven-year-old patient who drew the drawing uh in the middle. And as you can see, she's interacting with her family on the right side in the exam room. And where's the pediatrician? They're actually on the left and on this brown chair facing the other way, typing on her computer uh during the during the appointment. And if you look at the the year from the drawing, 2011, this was just a couple of years after the high-tech act. And this was when computers were playing a larger role in patient safety and clinical efficiency. And it really highlights however the hidden costs that uh that computers have brought into the healthcare system with them. But it also does highlight uh what I think is one of the biggest promises of ambient AI and pediatric care, which is creating less moments like this and and more face-toface time with patients. Um this is especially important in the uh the children's healthcare setting. we're taking the history is is not um solely the verbal content of of uh of the encounter but also the observations and interactions that you have with the the child and the family which require both verbocal verbal and physical attention. I've been using ambient scribes for the past year in my practice and uh you know helping lead the role out here at Stanford Children's. This has been a lot of the the source of of good feedback that we've had on people who are using ambient AI scribes in their practice is that it does give a lot more facetime with patients and reduces the amount of times that you would otherwise be diverting your attention to the computer. Um, speaking communication, speaking of communication, um, you know, verbal communication is not always um, the most preferred way for all patients to retain information. And a lot of these vendors also produce, um, uh, after visit summaries or written patient summaries of the encounter that's tailored to the encounter itself. And, you know, myself and others have used, you know, tools like these to help personalize the deliverables for patients after the encounter that I think helps the patient provider relationship as well. On the next slide, we talk a little bit more about um awesome. Thanks. We talk a little bit more about efficiency of care and how it impacts both primary care and subsp specialty peds. Um especially, you know, study on the left, especially with uh our primary care practices who see, you know, large patient volumes and especially appointments, you know, every 15 minutes, the documentation burden becomes a significant part of um of clinical practice. And that's where we see a lot of the usage and efficiency gains is is in the high volume settings. Um the reports of numbers that you'll see throughout literature are about like 1 to five minutes of uh savings per note and that's pretty consistent with what we've seen here as well. Um the there is like a hope of chart closure latency improving. So that's the time from when the clinician stop finishes seeing the patient to when the health system can build the insurance company essentially. And the hope is that if you can complete notes faster, you can uh decrease that turnaround time. The evidence on that is kind of modest so far and it's still kind of like uh something that all health systems are working on. Um one more thing that is specific to pediatrics and um clinical workflow and efficiency is sibling visits often um you know involve parents or caregivers wanting to talk about both siblings at once um in the room. And then especially with ambient tools when you have to switch the chart in order to ensure the information reaches the right chart that does present kind of like a workflow barrier that you know we each have our own ways of working around that when we're using these MBNAI tools and chain I think we'll talk about that in a few minutes. Um on the right side we talk a little bit about how the MBNA scribes are differentially impacting both primary care and subsp specialty PE settings. Um, I think this is where we've seen a lot of the impacts of models that are trained on adult or general medicine uh being used in pediatrics and and causing some of the inconsistencies that we've heard of. Um, a lot of times you'll you'll hear from docs that or other providers that specific parts of of the encounter that they would have assumed would have been pulled into the note. Um, you know, very specific details were not pulled into the note. Maybe because the models aren't trained to think that that part's important. That's probably been like the most frequent bit of feedback that we've gotten. Um the other important part, especially in the primary care setting, um well visit note templates represent like dozens of of individual templates. And sometimes these uh templates vary across practices and providers. And a big part of um incorporating ambientai scribes into workflow is making sure the individual subsections um from the ambient AI model are incorporated to each note. And that becomes uh a really labor intensive process of getting someone on board to start using these scribes, especially if they're not uh computer savvy in the first place to do that on their own. Um and then lastly, you know, we talked a little bit about patient child dynamics in the room. Um as awesome as it is that you can pay a lot more attention to that when you're not diving your attention to the computer, a lot of those things aren't documented, as you'd imagine, if they're not verbalized during the encounter by the AI scribe. And um that is like an added step that a lot of us have had to to remember to check for to make sure that um any of the unsaid things in the room are written in the note. >> All right. So next we want to talk a little bit about the considerations around applying um existing regulatory frameworks to novel technology like ambient scribes. Um this is a single session and so we're not going to be able to go into the scope and complexity around many of these regulatory issues but it's worthwhile thinking about uh how these uh issues get applied and then the added uh burden or complexity that arise from pediatric modes of care. Um to illustrate this, what I'd like to do is focus on regulations around consent for recording. Um and focus on three specific areas. One is uh provide a little information around the variation in state recording laws. then provide some data around for a given state how is a single regulatory framework applied differently at different health institutions and then finally think about what are some additional considerations that the pediatric community uh has to grapple with beyond the the existing regulatory challenges. So, just to level set for everybody, um, as Lindsay mentioned, um, yep, ambient scribes, uh, start with an audio recording of a clinic visit. People have a right to know, uh, when they are being recorded, particularly when they are speaking about personal health uh, and wellness issues. Uh, this these uh, laws around consent for recording are familiar to many folks. It comes up in things like when you call customer service line and you hear a recording that says this call is being recorded for quality or training purposes or when you walk into a store and you see a sign that says smile you aren't a camera. All of those are in in uh reaction to these existing uh regulatory requirements. Uh next slide please. So the intent with this slide is to illustrate the variation among states for how consent must be obtained for recording conversations. Uh the orange states here are one party states and what that means is that if a conversation is being recorded it requires the knowledge and consent of only a single party in that conversation in order for it to be acceptable. for our ambient scribe use cases. Uh presumably the provider's awareness and consent to the recording would considered to be efficient or considered to be sufficient and so there would not actually be a need to get additional consent from uh patients or anybody else in the room. Contrast that with the mint states and those are all party states. So what that means is that uh all parties who are being recorded must consent to the recording. Um for ambient scribe the implication there is not only do the in addition to the provider and the patient but anybody else in the room uh caregivers uh drivers babysitters uh must also consent to uh a recording. Next slide please. So if we if you think it's difficult across different states uh even within a single state there is substantial variability today in how these rules are put into practice. Uh what we have here are some survey results that were collected uh last month from a group of 22 CMIOS from the state of California for how they are operationalizing uh these concerns around obtaining consent in their organizations. Uh the focusing on the numbers here is probably not worth your effort but thinking about the types of questions that still need to be fleshed out in order to make this operational is is worthwhile. So the first is around how often does consent need to be obtained? Is it something that has to be obtained at every clinic visit or can you obtain it once from a patient and apply that consent to every subsequent visit? Thinking about how a uh consent needs to be documented. Is it sufficient to have verbal consent from a patient that is then documented at clinical note in a clinical note or do patients have to sign something um akin to uh surgical consents that they have been informed of the um recordings? Finally, who is able to obtain the consent? Is it something that can happen at the front desk when a patient checks in? perhaps done by a medical assistant or is it something that has to be done by the provider uh in the context when a um recording is about to happen. Now moving on to the the third piece where we start to think about what are additional complexities additional considerations in the pediatric space. So the results that I presented here are from uh not necessarily pediatric specific uh organizations. So we we see this variability in in uh both adult and pediatrics. But what are additional things that we need to worry about with with pediatrics? So the first thing is something that I hinted at earlier. So for places that are uh all party consent, you not only have to get consent from the patient and the caregiver, which is typically the sort of universe that we think about, but also everybody in the room. So if there are siblings, grandparents, friends who are in the room, they are all equally um required to to give consent. um that is not only an additional burden in terms of time getting everybody to sign a document or getting everybody to agree to to the recording but also our electronic health record systems are typically designed around the patient who is receiving care. So systems that require us to track documentation for people who aren't actually patients like the grandmother of the child who was there for the the visit um is uh immature and challenging for how we currently set up our documentation management. Second, we think about the um differences between medical decision-m and consent for recording. So pediatrics has a couple of unique environments in which consent or ability to give uh um rights for medical decision-m are um not necessarily always just the patient or the uh parent. So thinking about uh foster parents who potentially may have uh rights for medical decision-m and then also thinking about teens who may not be considered emancipated adults but in medical contexts are able to make medical decisions for themselves. The extent to which those medical decisions also u apply to the ability to consent for recording on behalf of a minor uh is not totally clear. Finally, the question of age of consent. So, we could all probably agree that a 2-year-old does not have to consent to have four recordings and that a 16-year-old does have to have consent for recordings. But does a seven-year-old does a six-year-old uh these are all things that are um as of yet not well defined. So, take message here is that novel technology like ambient scribes brings regulatory burden. That regulatory burden is felt most acutely in the early phases of technology roll out like we are today and that burden is felt more acutely in situations where there are unique dynamics like pediatrics. Thanks. >> Wonderful. So, excuse me. I am going to move on to discuss the um perspectives of uh this technology from our patients. And Lindsay, it looks like maybe these slides got mixed up because this is um the end of my um if you go to the sorry, no, if you go to the left, I think the prior slide. There we go. Perfect. So um so as AI scribes become more common in clinical settings um it's becoming increasingly important to understand how our patients feel about this novel technology um including their perceptions of the benefits of this tool as well as the concerns um around both their experience as well as how this tool is disclosed and we heard a little bit about that from both um Idan and and Keith earlier. Um I am leading the ongoing mixed methods study here at Stamford Children's to understand how our parents and adolescents um uh perceive this new um novel technology in pediatric care settings. We do have a secondary aim too of describing how these perceptions um sort of compare across diverse uh populations. But I just wanted to share some of our preliminary results from um from the study here. So as you can see in this first um graph here um many of our parents and adolescents generally feel comfortable if not very comfortable with the idea of AIC scribes being used in their pediatric visits in the future. So these are parents and adolescence who had not had um an AIC assisted visit. But for those who did have an AI scribe supported visit many participants actually felt that the physician could focus more on them during their visit which is a positive. Um, and again something uh Idan alluded to earlier. And then many actually agreed too that they would like their physician to continue using this tool um at future visits. Um, and so these highlight the benefits and sort of the positives that we're seeing from our patients and um parents around this technology. But I do want to um kind of emphasize some of the um themes that we've been finding in our qualitative analysis. So Lindsay, if you can go to the next slide. Um, part of this mixed method study um involves uh interviews where we're actually talking with patients and parents who actually um had an AI supported visit. And some of the emerging themes that we're seeing from this include um themes right here that uh are listed on the slide. So disclosure, visit experience, privacy, and security. And these three themes really continue to stand out as central to the patient voice. And so I want to just kind of focus on some of these here. Again, these are all very preliminary. Um this is just from eight interviews, but do I think um really highlight and capture some of those um kind of unique um experiences uh from our patients and parents. So Lindsay, if you go to the next slide, this first table is on disclosure. Um overall, you can see that um there's kind of a mixed um kind of um grouping of perceptions around disclosure. And this is how the physician is disclosing the tool to the patients and family. Um and so again this was something discussed uh in the prior presentation by Keith. Um but overall you can see that one the trust in the clinician actually contributes to positive perspective on um AI scribes. Um two there is um an expectation that the clinicians should be the one to disclose and this was sort of a neutral statement here. And then one of the negative statements that sort of came out um of this is that there continues to be um gaps in understanding and communication about its use. And so even though we see um generally patients feeling comfortable about this technology um when we sort of go deeper and in these uh in these interviews we're actually seeing that there are lots of information about the AI scribes that patients and parents actually don't realize and sort of um learn as a part of these interviews. And so I think that sort of highlights a little bit uh about the need for transparency and the need for um kind of clearer disclosure around these tools. If you go to the next slide, Lindsay, I will share that overwhelmingly there's been positive feedback around the visit experience. So, no negative experiences were reported from both patients and parents, which was excellent. Um, those who did have an AI supported visit again had overwhelmingly positive um comments. So, things around um kind of the optimism around the scribe being able to capture some of the comprehensive details of the visit um gave patients and parents a sense of security. Um we did see that there wasn't um much of a difference in um at least this particular population of parents and patients in the clinician's focus on uh on the patient and family, but primarily it was because these patients actually had a really strong positive relationship with their um physicians prior to the ambient AI scribe uh deployment. And so that was actually a positive that it didn't change um much um in their in their experience. But we do hope that will improve the experience for those who don't have um you know uh as good of a baseline experience with their with their providers. Um and then one neutral takeaway that I thought was very interesting was um this need for or preference I guess for a clearer visual separation between um provider generated text and AI generated text uh particularly in the AVS or the after visit summaries and the clinical notes. And so that was something that a parent had mentioned to me and and kind of wanted as a as a way to enhance transparency. Um and then I will just kind of end with uh the next slide which is privacy and security. And I would say that this was overwhelmingly um a topic that continued to um uh um I guess you know um go uh shoot I'm losing the word. I'm sorry. Um this was one of the topics that we discussed that overwhelmingly there were negative comments related to this and I mean you can probably guess that but there were um some neutral ones right so I think kind of as we think about the age of the patient and this is where it gets you know um to be kind of more specific to the pediatric population parents felt that you know when patients were or if their children were younger they felt more comfortable and kind of thought about sort of the future perceptions around this tool as the child gets older. And so that's one of the neutral comments that I have here and highlighted in terms of uh sort of the negative themes. Um there were a lot of concerns highlighted around um the recording on personal devices. uh the retention of our personal data and right now our um retention is 90 days of both the audio recordings and um uh the transcripts and uh the discussion of sensitive topics as well. So particular teenager top topics and confidentiality kind of not only from the parent perspective but from the teenager perspective too was highlighted as sort of a thing that sort of um they kind of uh had at the top of their mind. Um, so I think this all kind of emphasizes the need for continued evaluation of our patients and parents perspectives on this technology as well as co-development of patient materials to help improve and enhance transparency um, especially and to supplement the disclosure around this tool as well. Um, I'm going to pass it off to Chaan to further discuss some of the challenges of ambient AI use in pediatrics. >> Thank you. Thank you so much, Bethl, and uh, everyone. really great to be here. Um I my name is Chathan part of Stanford but primarily now based at Cornell in New York and I've had the experience of using an ambient scribe so far for approximately about a hundred outpatient primary care pediatric visits and I wanted to just start off this section of the discussion with a few personal anecdotes. Um, one situation recently that I was thinking about, you know, in pediatrics as multiple speakers have pointed out, you have multiple people in the room and even for something like consent, forgetting consent. You know, we talked about Keith had mentioned um, you know, at what age do you ask the child for their consent, but another thing that I've noticed is that you often have multiple parents or guardians in the room and they may have very different perspectives on how they feel about AI. So, I've had a couple of situations recently where one uh one parent had said, you know, they were not okay with it, but then they looked to their spouse and their spouse was like, I'm totally fine with it. And I, you know, I didn't try to force or pressur, but then, you know, that the parents took a little bit of time amongst themselves to decide how they felt about it. And I think, you know, obviously in adult care, you also may have multiple caregivers in the room, but I think in pediatrics that's uh even more precient at at times. So that's something to keep in mind. And then another situation I'll highlight as I get into some specific examples is uh it was taking care of a child shortly after Halloween and um they had they were describing all the Halloween candy that they were having. And oftentimes in pediatric visits, we do like to connect the conversation back to the child's perspective and take a little bit more time to create that connection. And the ambient scribe in the note, it had actually captured every bit of Halloween candy that was talked about. But the way it framed it in the note, it described it in a in a way that I would not have done that. It said the child's diet consists of Tootsie Rolls and M&M's and Twix. and it just the the framing and phrasing of it is is not how we would have would have captured that. But I think with that I want to take this moment to highlight a couple of areas where we think ambient scribes could do a better job for pediatrics. So wanted to highlight four specific examples and then I'm going to go through each one of these with a mini clinical vignette and talk about why this really matters. So one to the point I just made when speaking directly to the child to children the language and context of what a child shares is not always properly contextualized. uh many pediatric visits such as birth or wellchild visits have a combination of structured templates plus free form conversation and scribes are not necessarily optimized for that and it's it's a combination of what the scribe itself is doing but also the integration with the with the ehr adolescent confidentiality um needs to be built into the technology and the processes in place and then it's also as pointed out earlier by Iden it's fairly common for multiple siblings in one vis visit and the way most scribes work right now is that they they can only really focus on one patient at a time. Um, so I want to talk about each of these with a few specific vignettes. Go to the next slide. So kind of zooming in further on to children's voices, it's it's really important um that uh as you know as a pediatrician our our patient is a child and at different developmental milestones, ages, they may be able to share more and what I particularly focus on is to ensuring even a young child who may not be fully verbal yet or can only speak in broken sentences. I think it's really important to include them in the conversation of their care. And sometimes they're using broken words, languages, or combination of words and gestures. And with clinical scribes in this vignette, uh it's a situation where a four-year-old is asked where it hurts and they point to their ear and say it goes boom boom. um and the scribe doesn't necessarily pick up on that as a symptom and the parent is maybe making some non-verbal comments or maybe they say he seems fussy but in my clinical interpretation of all that's going on in the room I interpret that as ear pain and may note that down as such and I think scribes have a powerful opportunity here to actually capture some more of that nuance that comes directly from a child's voice but I think if we only train scribes to work off of adult data and they're not trained in some of the nuances of how children speak. They may flatten that language and not capture all of that nuance that that exists, that richness that's there. Next slide. Many pediatric visits, a a real common type of pediatric visit is the wild child visit. And I believe um Idan had mentioned that we have dozens of templates at different ages. And the way most of these visits work is that we like to use a combination of the template plus free form conversations. The templates have been highly optimized at different institutions to capture key structured data around sleep and food and a number of other facets of a child's life such as developmental milestones. But oftentimes we also like to delve into these further with open-ended conversation. And so in this vignette and a nine-month check, the pediatricians asking about motor milestones, talking to parents about sleep routines, providing anticipatory guidance on choking hazards. And the scribe captured a long paragraph about the sleep, but it might have missed those milestone responses and anticipatory guidance because it was uh really hyperfocused on that on that sleep portion. So just uh you know part of the challenge of making scribes work well for wildchild visits is that we have this combination of templated and free form conversation. And this is really an open conversation and open challenge for not only de not only scribe vendors but really for health systems as we think about these mixed flows where we are using ambient tools uh with open conversation as well as structured templates. And in my own workflow, what I've been doing for wellchild visits is I will turn the ambient scribe on and I will use a structured wellchild visit template and go back and forth and really I'm using that templated note but then any of the additional details the scribe captures I will sometimes paste in to to add more context and all bits of information. Next slide. As um Bethl had pointed out, adolescent confidentiality is is a really key area that of of focus uh that needs special protections. In most states, uh not to delve too too far into this, but in most states uh teens have the right to confidential care on sexual health, mental health, substance use. And this uh varies based on the age and in each state, but generally when you're kind of in the 13 to 17 age range. And the way most health systems handle this is to create a separate protected confidential note. Often times there are there is information that may overlap or or cross cross um from a more confidential section to to non-conidential section. But the when we think about this in the context of scribes as Lindsay had um described in the initial vignette, you have a situation where someone is stepping a teen is stepping out of the room and there's all sorts of questions around whether you have to reassent the child um to keep the conversation going with the scribe or not. Um, I personally have not had experiences in clinical care with uh using a scribe for an adolescent visit yet. Um, but I think it's really critical to ensure that the adolescent themselves feels confident uh and and comfortable with the scribe being used. And this is often a time where more sensitive information such as the discussion of vaping or sexual orientation may be discussed in ways that the parent may not be aware of that. And it's really important that scribes and the workflows around them are are really designed to make sure that that is protected. Next slide. And the last issue that I'll highlight is the fact that a lot of pediatric visits have multiple siblings and um it, you know, really makes it it's critical for parents um where it's often times hard to schedule time to have separate visits for each child. And part of the benefit of having multiple siblings together for something like a wellchild visit is there's often common social family history that we'd like to be able to take together uh because children are in the same household and have some common genetic information. And unfortunately the way scribes work and generally ehrs they're really set up for one patient at a time. And it does make sense because you don't want information about one patient to go to another patient's chart. But the natural workflow in a wellchild visit with multiple siblings is while you do talk about each child separately, there is often times information that comes up um from one child to the other. And I've had this situation happen a few times where I have used an ambient scribe for multiple siblings and we're talking about one child and then all of a sudden a parent may say, "Oh, actually I forgot to mention something about the other child and talks about that." And then the scribe is now mixing up information. it doesn't necessarily know the context of exactly who you're talking about and this has the potential to create documentation uh errors that that could be a safety issue and so this is really a challenging call to not only scribe companies but also EHR vendors and health systems and how we can better support the technology working across uh multiple uh multiple patients multiple siblings in pediatric wellchild visits. So with that I want to turn it over to Naimisha who is going to really take all these these challenges and talk about the opportunities and the wish lists of how we ensure ambient scrubs really work well for pediatric care. >> Awesome. Thank you so much. Um, I'm going to take us home um with combining the incredible insights from my colleagues on um on the panel uh for our six wish list items. I'm sure there's definitely more for what we hope um ambient listening technology um for pediatrics should try to optimize. So number one include capabilities to capture child input independent of parents and specifically highlighting uh language concordant documentation. So being mindful of the fact that children and their caregivers may have different language needs that also evolve over time. Number two, the ability to document both structured and unstructured free form content to suit wellchild visits. I also want to expand that to include questionnaire data that parents might fill out ahead of the visit that often um uh pediatricians are required to integrate into notes. And so um including that information and being able to capture that uh would be really crucial. Number three, capabilities for classifying information as confidential to only be placed in the confidential documentation. Um I know several EHR vendors are moving towards that kind of model for documentation but not necessarily in collaboration with ambient documentation. So I I think uh identifying that would be incredible. Uh capabilities for dual visit number four. Um so like Chathan uh beautifully exemplified how do you capture ambient listening for both siblings or multiple siblings. Number five capabilities for multiple caregivers. So um like highlighted um two caregivers may have different perspectives and how do you document that efficiently and six robust models that are trained on a diverse pediatric populations and number two pediatric subsp specialty care whose ambient listening needs might be very different than that of a general pediatric visit. At this time I'm going to turn it over to Lindsay to close us out. Too many windows open. Okay. So, um here are some resources. We're going to have uh an opportunity. There's a few questions in the chat. If you have other questions, please throw them in. We're going to use the remainder of the time to kind of have more of an open discussion and want to hear what you are concerned about or have questions about or have thoughts on. Um these are some some resources. The first one is our group's um page. We're going to put a recording of this webinar on there uh in the near future. Uh so if you want to share it with colleagues. Um the American Academy of Pediatrics, I know we have some representatives from that group uh as well. Uh has a really wonderful AI education portal uh with lots of webinars on different AI topics. Uh and then the we also have representatives from the digital medicine society here as well. and we helped co-create the pediatric digital medicine playbook which isn't necessarily specific to ambient scribes but talks about digital health in pediatric populations in general and is a really great resource. Um so I see there's a couple questions in the chat and there's been a couple answered. So u just we're not recommending any specific vendors here. We're really trying to think about this broadly. Um we do use DAX co-pilot at Stanford. But I don't know what they use at at Cornell. Uh Chathan, >> it's also ducks. >> Yeah. But there are many vendors and and this is really a vendor neutral presentation. Um the recording as Idan mentioned in in his answer, the recording rules tend to vary institution institution based on the agreements made. Um but they are deidentified and then deleted at at some point in the future. Um some of those are are very tight timelines. Some of those are up to a year. Uh but usually after a year those are are purged. Um so uh first question that that is open um uh one person asked about the the state of ambient listening AI AI scribes for inpatient settings. I don't know if if one of you want to take that. >> Yeah. So it's it's something that is is coming. um vendors either have it available now or at a uh widespread availability or it's it's in pilot use. Um we do not have it rolled out at our organization yet. So uh we have limited ability to comment on how effective it is but it's coming. >> Okay. And then let's see um second one. Let's see. Scribes did have scribes improved productivity. There was a New England Journal of Medicine article yesterday. Can you talk about note savings times at Stanford and Cornell? Iden can speak to it a little bit here at Stanford. >> Yeah, thank thank you for asking. I I saw that article too this morning. Super interesting. The um it really depends on the provider and their workflows and what their baseline is and how long they're studying notes. um you know on the practices where the scribe has been adapted most essentially here we do see what is essentially um kind of like an industry average of maybe one to five minutes per note that's been saved but uh again it it really depends on like the clinical setting and I think what this uh paper is showing too um that you know we see in other institutions see is that it depends on uh how well it's integrated into the clinician's workflow and how much editing they have to do. A lot of our subsp specialists, for example, have to do a lot of editing after the fact to make sure that the um content from the conversation appears out onto the note. So, that's an example of where sometimes it does take a little bit longer to use the ambient AI scribe to write notes. But, it does depend on who who is using it and kind of what clinical setting it is. >> There's one that's kind of a tech onto that one. Um, how has the adoption rate been amongst clinicians? Yeah, you know, um, Keith, you may know the exact adoption rates off top of your head, but I think the kind of average between institutions that I've heard is between like 25 to 35% or so of all clinicians. Um, and that's like a number that I've just heard throughout presentations that's pretty consistent um, with what I've observed. >> Yep. I think one thing to add there too is it's always been a consideration is what should be the adoption rate. I think everyone assumes that should it be 100% and I think um just because a tool's available doesn't mean every clinician has to use it or wants to use it and is the most effective tool for their work. So I think just highlighting that as I think adoption rates are good metrics to follow to understand how many clinicians are using but not necessarily to say that 100% should be the target. >> Yeah. Yeah, thanks. I'm sure over here we're we're looking carefully to see who who could benefit from the most, right? Instead of ensuring that everyone uses it. Yeah. >> Okay. We have one from Dr. Khan. Uh, how is the AI scribe described to patients for consent that have different medical literacy levels? Maybe Bethl, do you want to take that one? >> Yeah, happy to take this. Hey Na, thanks for the question. And um you know this is something that um I think is still an ongoing discussion um for several of the reasons that Keith brought up in his um discussion around consenting. Um we are doing our best to actually work on developing patient materials, patient facing materials, excuse me. um so that less of the onus is on the physician to go through all of the details um that are important for improving transparency around this tool. Um so things around um the uh data storage, the data usage, all of those things that we sort of would we have information on and the providers also do too, but don't necessarily have the time and the visits to kind of have that discussion. you know, knowing that our visits are very short and limited. Um, so I think it's really important. I think trying to figure out the best way to do this in practice has been the challenge. Um but I will say that with the materials we're working on, we're actually working directly with our health literacy team to ensure that one the patient materials are um uh in uh written in a in such a way that um all patients and families will be able to understand uh those materials as well as translating that into um languages that our patients um understand as well. And so we're being very mindful. I don't know how other institutions are doing that but that's something of high priority for us here. Um but and certainly things that we're thinking about as well. We've talked with you know as we were deploying this and I helped uh lead our our deployment here as well. Um, I had a conversation with our patient and family advisory council on what their thoughts were kind of initially as we were rolling this out and that um the the theme around informed consent continued to come up. And so again, this is something that we're thinking a lot about and we're wanting to understand how to operationalize it again in a way that um kind of allows for clinical efficiency but also um enhance transparency as best as as we can. um particularly for our our marginalized patients and patients with low um health literacy. Sale, >> do you want to briefly comment on um Cornell? Yeah. So, um I can just share I think you know in terms of institutionwide we've sort of had a general consent language um that was shared with everyone of of how to ask for consent and have not necessarily gone into um specific language or different different literacy levels. But I can share one of the things that I've been doing uh in all my visits is being very transparent with everything that's happening. So right now I think what we do that's probably similar to most institutions is that the recording takes place on our phone using the mobile version of the EHR. So I go over to the family if once they've um as so usually I step into the room I introduce the idea of using the AI recorder um ask if they are okay with it and if they have questions. If they are, I then show them what it looks like where I go over, log into their child's uh specific chart, show them that this is specifically within their child's record and do a lot of visual pointing so you get oriented to it and then show them the ambient record tab and then show them right when I hit record as well. So I think that that visual um showing exactly what's going on is is helpful. doesn't answer everything in ter in terms of challenges with with literacy, but I think being transparent um is really key. And then I also depending on the amount of time I have, I will try to show parents the draft note that gets generated um because it usually pops up a few seconds afterwards and parents have found that really interesting and some um to really be able to see the power of of using this. >> Great. Well, I wanted to save this one because this is question that tends to generate a lot of um a lot of questions and swirl, but uh we have a question. What are your thoughts on allowing residents to use these tools? There's been a lot of concern about deskkilling, never skilling, unskilling that is weighed against the potential benefits in the productivity and patient provider interactions. Um Bethl, do you want to start with that one? >> Sure. Yeah. Hi James, thanks so much for the question. Um so yeah, we've had a lot of discussions around this and I think everyone on this panel can um share their thoughts and um I think uh you know it's it's been fascinating to hear um the various program directors across our Stanford medicine GME and their thoughts around whether or not trainees should be allowed to use this to technology in training. And I will say from analyzing their um their thoughts and and feedback um it does seem like there is both overwhelming enthusiasm about um exposing our trainees to this technology as well as a lot of concerns around just as you pointed out the deskkilling um that may come as a sort of consequence of you using this tool. Um we at at Stanford um have actually um we uh collaborated with our um GME representatives and leaders and actually they decided to allow each program and program director to decide on how DAX was going to be used um during their medical training. And we did see a a quite a wide rate of range of variability across um the decisions related to that. But I will say that um there are some policies in place that are actually limiting the um use of certain smart sections within notes as well as limiting um the use of AI scribes for certain trainee levels for example. Um, and so I think those are some of the kind of guard rails that folks are trying to place um, to ensure that trainees are getting exposed to this technology that's sort of revolutionizing clinical care um, while also ensuring that we're preserving the um, opportunity for them to build clinical reasoning. Um, and we're actually seeing some differences between residency programs and fellowship programs as you can imagine just given the level of training between those two populations. But, um, I don't know what the right answer is. I would say that I'm optimistic optimistically cautious when it comes to it. I think it's an amazing tool that should be exposed to trainees during training. Um probably at the you know after the first um year or so is is probably what I would say. But I think you know um a lot of the studies that we're doing right now are not going to really yield much uh insight until kind of further down the line. So it's really hard to say what those implications are going to have on the future of our trainees. >> I think that's a good point. This is an area ripe for for investigation. And the the main issue is that often you don't know that someone isn't like didn't get exposure, didn't get capacity until further down the line in their training or in their their career where they're they missed out on something and then uh an incident comes up where they're not able to to manage that. And so I think what we've talked about to Bethl's point is is really thinking critically about when they are and then using it as an opportunity as a teaching tool. So um you know you are generating a transcript right away and so can the teaching attending use that as an opportunity to see what what the resident or the trainee talk to the patient about how they ask certain questions etc and give feedback. Um, and so there's really an opportunity to then use this tool to give more real-time feedback and the notes going to be generated much quicker. And so then it's another opportunity for them to to give that feedback. Um, if they're waiting for a day or two for a note to come back, they may not get that opportunity to give them in-person uh feedback. So there are both opportunities and concerns and and definitely right now at Stanford we are allowing all of our pediatric residents to use this tool but with the caveat that um you know it's right now only in our in our outpatient practices. We have not yet turned it on in the inpatient setting. So there's minimal exposure. There's also they work at other institutions that don't yet have ambient scribes and so they'll still have opportunities to practice those skills. But if it becomes an issue where all clinics and all inpatient settings use it, do we need them to have some training wheels first before we turn it on? >> Yeah. And one small anecdote I'll add to that is we we have AI education classes for the med students and we did a informal survey at the beginning seeing what people's opinions are on using ambient scribes in practice and these are of you know first year med students and many of them actually said that hey we shouldn't actually do be allowed to use these until later on in training. So I think it's not only like a top- down approach. I think it's, you know, the learners as well have an element of wanting to learn how to do this by hand first, which I think is important to to know and it's not a obviously it's not a representative sample, but it was an eye openening stat when we pulled the audience. >> Okay, we have another question. Um, what have you seen about the quality of the generated note that anybody wants to answer that? I can um I can just share kind of some you know anecdotal experiences of it and feel free to for others to to jump in but I think in my experience of using it for about a 100 or so patients um it I found that the notes are pretty good about 80 to 90% of the time I've noticed you know minor errors but then I have noticed um I'll I'll point out one significant error that I noticed I um had diagnosed a child with Lyme disease and then was describing the antibiotic use to um um to to treat it. And we we got into a conversation about the potential complications of the condition if left untreated or what could happen. And the the scribe when it wrote out the note, it actually described the complications the complications of the disease that we talked about, it attributed to the medication. It said the medication can cause all these side effects and described the side effects as the the complication of the um condition. And so I think scribe and I've noticed that happen a few times um in kind of a similar issue with with a few other settings. So that's been some of the more kind of extreme examples of errors that I've seen in my in my use of scribe so far. And I think there there are some folks who are working on trying to do a better taxonomy of of classification of errors that come up with with um with these types of tools. I know uh Dr. Steven Ma who's on the adult side at Stanford Healthcare has recently led a paper doing a taxonomy of classifying the errors that you see in not necessarily ambient documentation but in AI assisted messaging and I think there's more work going on in this space but overall I think um for my own workflow the using the scribes has been extremely helpful at being able to help me finish notes on time um and really capture a lot of the details. >> Oh, great. Well, we're getting close to 1:00, so I wanted to make sure we ended on time. Um, there's a QR code up here if you want to fill out a form to stay in touch with us. Uh, our email, we also have a group email, pet peeves digitalalth@stanford.edu, free feel free to send a message to that or to any of us individually. Uh, we're happy to answer any questions. We really appreciate you guys joining us today. Um, and like I said, we'll we'll try and post this recording um at some point in the near future as well. So, uh, thanks again and hope you have a wonderful day.