Title: Can AI Write Better Discharge Summaries?
Channel: AI and Healthcare
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SuX580I3Qyo
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

I don't know if the last time you drove in a car that did not have a backup camera, but if your car has a backup backup camera, you probably have gotten used to it starting to beep loudly at you if you're about to back up and hit something. And then if you've been doing that for years and you get into a car without a backup camera, you might just back up and wait for the beeps and not realize those beeps aren't going to come. You have been deskskilled in your backup skills. And so the question is if learners are relying on AI to do things for them, are they going to deskkill or might they be never skilled in the first place? Hello and welcome to AI and healthcare. I'm Mika Newton, your host, and I'm super excited to be here today with a friend and colleague who I've known for quite a little bit, Dr. Ben Rosner. Ben, great to see you as always. Am it's great to be here. >> Great. So, um, you and I know each other, but maybe just for our audience, could you give us like the quick like one minute on who you are and and things that you've been working on? >> Sure. So, uh, I am a, um, a hospitalist at the University of California, San Francisco. A hospitalist is kind of like a primary care doctor just in the hospital. Um, but I'm also a PhD researcher and I do research on digital health, artificial intelligence, uh, how digital health companies integrate into electronic health records. And, um, and you know, my background, uh, is has always been at the interface between technology and medicine, looking at how we can kind of apply technology to make what was initially the triple aim, then became the quadruple aim, and then the quintuple aim of health care better. But this is over about improving health care for patients, for health care providers, for the system in general. >> Awesome. And we're going to have a lot to talk about. So I was just reflecting back thinking about this conversation um from earlier. You and I worked what must be 15 years ago um together. And so I thought one of the interesting things we could kind of do is a little bit of the then and now and maybe what's next sort of perspective um from from ourselves. So over the time I I think as you reflect back over kind of the last decade or so and then maybe bringing it into the context of some of the projects you've been working on where do you think we're going in the context of AI use in hospital system because it's a buzz right everyone's talking about it and a big question I have is is it really happening is it something that was anticipated and thought about for a long time and is now something people were ready for is it a brand new thing that people just started thinking about and are going to the for uh going to implement in the future So kind of where are we from your perspective in the implementation of AI in hospital systems? >> Yeah. So I I think when we think about how technology is in influencing care um you know there there have been a couple of major um milestones or events that I think were really big ones. So Sam back when you and I initially um worked together it wasn't long after like the electronic health record became this this new thing. And I, you know, I trained in medical school in the day when they were paper charts and the transition to the electronic health record itself was a massive change, you know, that was meant to drive improvements in care, cost reduction, all that stuff. Whether or not it achieved those, that's a separate question, but it was a fundamental change in the way we practice medicine. And it's not very often that we encounter those sorts of things. But I will say generative artificial intelligence which is a special kind of artificial intelligence does feel like a seed change in the way medicine will be practiced in the future. We are really just at the beginning but it is um it's a massive change that we are already seeing um electronic health record vendors uh pivot in a big way to accommodate and most health systems trying to figure out what they're going to use and how they're going to use it and how they're going to monitor the use of these kinds of tools. So as you think about that and and evaluating them um and I want to come to a project that I know that you you've worked on here is it about finding the specific utility is it about its integration into the platform itself like what are the kind of levers as a health systems thinking about it that you're trying to balance you know safety security we've spent a lot of time talking about that biases is it access to the MR does it have to be like part of the EMR that you buy or could it be a third party like I think a lot of these things seem you know complex at best. The the use cases are innumerable and they range everywhere from the totally not sexy like administrative use cases you know to help with like back office types of things whether it's billing and coding and revenue cycle management to the sexier stuff that is sort of more like clinician and patientf facing. Um and so there are all kinds of of use cases too for like even how do we train um medical students and residents and what are good use cases for their learning. Uh and so these are um these are possible both with tools that are not inherently part of the electronic health record system as well as tools that are deeply embedded into the system that are third-party vendor tools but as well as electronic health record um vendors themselves who are rolling out baked in generative AI capabilities and even in some cases that are AI native electronic health systems. So it is covering the entire spectrum and you know what each health system is choosing to focus on depends a little bit in part on what their pain points are. Um revenue will always be a pain point for for health systems but you know in some cases from patient safety perspective maybe that's a pain point in one area or um how to train better you know um medical students or residents might be a pain point for other health systems. So it's it's really all over the board. What I will say that's in common is a lot of health systems have created roles called chief health AI officers that did not exist even a couple of year ago years ago. Um when I was training chief medical information officer didn't exist and that's sort of a a fairly standard thing now. Chief health AI officers are are now becoming widespread and every health system is going to need to figure out how do you implement these tools and how do you monitor them over time. Yeah, that's a great point. So, just I guess a comment though that came to mind. It feels like when the EMR vendors, the Epics, the Oracle Healths of the world, etc. are rolling out native built-in Gen AI capabilities, right? We've definitely moved away from the like does AI even belong in healthcare debate, which frankly wasn't happening even that long ago, right? like there was a lot of well how do we trust and all the rest of it but if it's coming out of the box so to speak now from the actual core suppliers of the systems themselves that makes me feel feels to me like it's here and it's here to stay the choice between using out of the box functionality I assume and third parties is more about you know extra cost spend or value and so we're going to get some value competition which is good I think um uh and security now I know you you worked on a project related to discharge summaries specifically. So that's, you know, one specific thing. Could you kind of describe that project and maybe that was like a hands-on experience in in trying to implement AI for a specific use case, right? >> Yeah. So, you know, one of the things that these large language models, like many people have heard of chat GPT, that they've gotten increasingly good at is is summarizing. and summarizing what is in the chart is a a relatively lower stakes type of function than for example asking the large language model to help make a diagnosis or to help uh with treatment decisions. Those are higher stake things. But the idea of chart summarization also sort of followed on the heels of one of the early types of rollouts which is you know a lot of primary care physicians they have email inboxes and they are inundated with emails and uh and so several health systems kind of rolled out automated draft responses that were generated by large language models. they were fairly good at sort of looking at the question the patient emailed in, looking through the chart, and then drafting a response that the physician then could edit before sending. Um, and on the heels of that, um, I'm a hospitalist, and so one of the one of the the big tasks a hospitalist has to do before a patient gets discharged from the hospital is to write what's called a hospital discharge summary. This is supposed to summarize like all the clinically important events that happened and the some of the follow-up needs. And these summaries typically get sent to the primary care physician or if the patient is going to a skilled nursing facility after hospitalization, it gets sent to that physician. But the challenge with writing these discharge summaries is that to write a high quality discharge summary requires the hospital physician to look through that hospitalization. And you can imagine the longer the patient's been in the hospital, the harder it is to write a summary of all the important things that happened. And for those uh in your audience who don't know, you know, many most often when patients are hospitalized, they are not cared for just by one hospital physician who has been with them for their entire hospitalization who might sort of have in their head, here's all the things that happened. So for example, I I think I had a few months ago, I came on to service. It was my second day on service and there was a patient who had been in the hospital for more than 3 months and they were getting ready to discharge and so I am tasked with I have got to summarize the last 3 months I've only known the patient for two days and so to generate a good quality discharge summary I'd have to take an hour and a half of my time and start what we call chart biopsying looking through the notes uh throughout the hospitalization and then starting to compose this summary. Well, that's burdensome. It's called documentation burden. But it also takes an hour and a half of my time when I could be seeing other patients to just write this thing. And so the the question we asked is, well, can these large language models look through the entire hospitalization and write a decent highquality safe draft of the summary that then the physician can go in and edit and then sign and send. And so we did a study to look at the quality and the potential for harm that these large language model drafted discharge summaries uh could uh these large language models could draft um for discharge summaries. >> Interesting. Is there a standard? So I think anytime I hear of kind of a study of saying like hey did the model do a good job like what do you compare it to? Is it just what you as a clinician feel is a good discharge summary? Is it is there a standard format or form or you know what should be included in the discharge summary versus what's trivial? Does that vary like what what's the comparator? >> Yeah. First of all, what should be included in a discharge summary? There there are some standards for that and a lot of those can get automatically pulled into the discharge summary like the medication list and the the the discharge diagnosis. The part that's really time consuming to write is this narrative like here is what happened. Um there are some emerging standards. One is called a PDSQI9. There's one called a 4C's. These are some metrics that have been developed about like what what consists uh or what should be present for a good summary. But I will say many of them are similar in like in that you know the the summary should be coherent meaning that >> the oh should be like it should make sense. It should be logical but it also should be concise. You don't want to discharge somebody that rambles on indefinitely. It should be um you know free of errors. We have heard of the term like hallucination. That's just one error type. Um but there are other error types. There are inaccuracies. Um there's omissions. Um and so there's there's a handful of these dimensions. In our study, we also added if you're looking at the errors, what is the potential for harm that each error could cause? because just counting errors is not super helpful. You want to know like what how likely is that error to maybe cause death versus maybe just cause some emotional harm or whatever. So we actually quantified also the potential for error of each harm. Um, and then like in our study, we actually asked our human reviewers when they were blinded as to who wrote the summary. Was it a physician or was it the large language model, which one of these do you prefer? And what is your ranking of the overall quality of these things? So, those are some of the metrics we used and they're they're pretty similar to metrics that a bunch of others are using uh for for similar things. So who who wins is or wins is probably the wrong word but I guess the real question is can you use LLM to reduce the administrative the document burden for discharge summaries. Is it ready to go and like what should we worry about? But I actually I really like the fact that you looked at harms because the question I assume depends on what kind of discharge is it and how you know how sick was the patient and were they there for 3 months or one day? Uh and and and seems like there's a pretty broad spread there. Yeah. Well, to to answer your first question, are we there yet? Are they ready to go? Um the answer seems like a yes. Um I will explain some of the details of our study, but in many ways they were equivalent. um the human and the and the LM written discharge summary. We've seen other papers come out after ours too. Ours was um ours was published in JAMAMA internal medicine. There was another nice paper out of NYU that was uh published in JAMAMA network open. And not only do these uh these studies seem like yes, we're there. We're ready to start piloting these um for real, but also we see the electronic health record vendors actually making this capability now. So they're rolling it out actively right now. Making this capability available. Now doing this with real patients, you know, is a different thing than doing it on sort of historical charts. And so health systems that do plan to deploy these things um need to think about how are they going to evaluate these pilots? Um how are they going to do it safely? Um but you know the the goal is yes to decrease the documentation burden but also give back time to the physician so they can actually do patient care as opposed to just doing documentation. Um the thing that's pretty interesting the way the way we did our study is we actually took some uh 100 charts of patients that were in the hospital that had already happened. These are deidentified charts. So there's no patient identifiers. We then removed the discharge summary that the physician wrote. So now we have this corpus of hospital notes. We fed those notes to the large language model and said generate a discharge summary. Then we had this physician written discharge summary that we had removed. We had the LLM written discharge summary and we asked an army of human physician reviewers to look at the physician written discharge summary and compare it to the hospital notes. So we used all those hospital notes as the gold standard. And we also asked them to look at this LLM summary compared to the hospital notes. and you ask them for errors, including hallucinations. Here's what's interesting. Even the human physicians hallucinated, and the human physicians made errors. So, a lot of people think, well, can the large language models be error-free? And I'd say that's the wrong benchmark to compare them to because the human physicians are not error-free. They're not even hallucination free. And so, really what we were looking at is are they comparable or better than the current level of care, which is the human physician note. And for the most part we found they were we did find for example that the large language models made per discharge sum they made more errors but those errors had very low potential for harm. And overall our our reviewers had equal preference for the large language model summary versus the human summary. They found large language model summaries were more concise and more coherent than the humans. So for the most part they were fairly equivalent. That doesn't mean that when these things get rolled out in real practice we don't need to be diligent about looking at these potentials for harm errors etc. When that if I use the tools to generate one I need to make sure still to read that draft. There is always the risk of this thing called despilling or cognitive laziness which is to say I trust the large language model enough that I'm just going to sign it. And that we have to be really careful about because we do need to carefully read these things and then correct errors and make edits before we sign them. Yeah, I learned that the hard way with having AI write my emails. Um, you might want to read them first, right, before you send them, otherwise things get strange very quickly. Um, sorry, bad joke. Um, you know, it's interesting as I think about that. So one of the things you know I've been working on right and companies been working on is actually reading medical records and we're using AI to read medical records and I think many of the large EHR vendors are actually rolling out this kind of in inrecord summarization and then those records are eventually going to be potentially passed to another hospital. patient, particularly one who might have chronic diseases, right? Or may have several things wrong with them, may not just go to one system. They might actually travel between system systems and move from one system to another. And so I always think about like how soon are we going to get to the point where the AI is reading what the AI wrote, right? And do these errors then start to propagate? Right? So if you introduce an error and where I've seen this before like working with cancer patients in particular, we see this pretty often is the progress notes right are simply cut. There's this like cut and paste and cut and paste and whoever the next person is who's coming along or for the next visit, the entire note or summary of of the previous visit is cut and pasted and then something is changed or added to it in the top part. And when you go back and you start looking for the errors, you find the error was made, you know, a year ago or two years ago, but it's now been repeated so many times that if somebody didn't go back all the way to the very beginning and say, why, you know, why did this happen, right? You would never assume, it's not even in the last one, it's in 200 rows down basically in in the field. Is that something that gets talked about? is that or or anticipated as we start rolling this sort of stuff out. >> Yeah, the idea of error propagation is super important. That's a great use case or example. I will say that you know we're in in such early days with the roll out and use of these tools. I don't think people are are thinking that far ahead. Um but it is an important consideration. I mean theoretically the exact same thing can happen with a human too, right? like a human introduces a hallucination or an error and that simply gets propagated. I I don't even know actually the degree to which you know if that has been studied to the degree to which that already happens but I'm sure it does. Um and so it's another thing that should be added to the table of like monitoring like how can we monitor these things and then can we catch them and correct them. Well, the example I gave you was a human, and I've seen it, we saw seen it many, many, many times um uh over again where the same thing were initial errors. It actually makes me wonder if there's a study to be done about using AI to find the errors, right? And you know if we don't have to introduce kind of the safeguard systems on the other side of the coin which says we know that we're generating a lot of information and data here you know have this other model go and check on our generating model and go and find places where you think it might have made a mistake right um and that we're going to need some sort of error correction um in there we probably need it for the humans as much as we need it for any AI that's trying to replicate one of our tasks. >> Yeah. Well, I mean what you're describing if you don't know there's already a term for it which is LLM as a judge. So one model generates some output and you have another model assess that output for errors. But there's even a better arguably better approach and this is just emerging and in fact it's something that I have um a study just getting underway on right now which is LLM as a jury. And so a LM as a judge is just one LLM judging the output of an initial LLM. But LLM as a jury is imagine you put several different models all into the same room together and you say duke it out with each other and come to consensus. Like we want you to evaluate the output of the initial LLM and now there's three of you in the room. Duke it out, come to consensus. And so we are trying to take a look at can LLMs as a jury be just as good or maybe even better at detecting errors than humans? And here's the interesting thing. In this paper that we published, we had 22 physicians reviewing all of these discharge summaries. And it was a massive effort. And that does not and it will not scale. And so imagine like a health system, they implement some generative AI tool and then I don't know five, six months later the tool gets updated and you've moved on to the next model. There's there's no way to scale that army of people again to go through the entire thing all over again. And so we really need to think about more scalable ways to monitor and assess the quality of the outputs. So LLM as a jury is is still sort of emerging, but um it'll be interesting to see whether they can do a better job at least maybe to get us 90% of the way and then leave the last 10% for humans. >> Yeah, that's a really interesting So first of all, I'm very interested to hear about the outcome of LLM as a jury. It reminds me of a discussion um uh that we had actually uh with the FDA earlier. We were talking about software as a medical device many years ago and we were very interested in developing medical devices in which the algorithms would evolve over time. So as continuous learning, right, as part of the algorithm, well, that gets hairy pretty quickly, right? If you're going to have an approved medical device where you need to understand the performance characteristics of it, and if it learns from every interaction with every patient, which is probably closer to the way human beings learn, right? I would assume that physicians are learning from every interaction or trying to and developing better skills. Um, how do you know when when it's going wrong or going better? And we were trying to develop um a mechanism to essentially put continuous improvement to put performance bounds around the outputs of the model. So you would know that there was some threshold that if you crossed it in some particular direction that it was time to break out the human jury again. It was like when did you need to to notice that difference? Um and so we thought about performance characteristics. The other thing that we spent a bunch of time thinking about was could you actually just run the models simultaneously? So if you have these computing models, which is what you're reminding me of, it's the jury question. How far apart do they need to be where you say, "Wait a minute, there's a true like what's the disagreement level?" Right? At which point you say, "You know what? I actually don't want you to come to consensus. I've got to check again because, you know, you say it's it's red, you say it's black, right? And it's definitely probably one or the other and not some sort of, you know, dark purple in the middle. So, how do we do that sort of thing? So I'm actually fascinated to hear that that works out because I also couldn't imagine how you can validate this type of work at scale especially if we implement AI out through AI throughout the workflow processes um of these hospital systems. So really cool cool I have another uh different maybe different line of question here. Um I've been thinking a fair about bit about AI and medical education and actually uh medical education in terms I think of both educating and learn I use AI to do research right and then I I try to accept I get the results sometimes I believe it sometimes I don't sometimes I go double check it um there's been a fair amount of discussion lately about people just believing the AI no matter what it says and not going to validate this kind of cognitive laziness there's a whole thing about AI psychosis where I guess people have convinced themselves that the AI is telling them the truth and it tells them things that are completely untrue about themselves. Um, are we going to get to a place where we can trust uh the generative AI with the basic education or learning that you need to go through as a physician? That's why I think like medical education. How am I learning from the AI? Is it summarizing things correctly? it is that an area where this will also work out outside of the hospital environment. >> Yeah, I mean one of my roles at UCSF is I'm also the faculty lead for AI innovations in medical education for the school of medicine. And these are some of the very things that we are the very questions we're struggling with ourselves. There there are some you know kind of low stakes use cases for AI and medical education and some higher stakes one ones. So some of the lower stakes ones again not not super sexy but here's an example. um you know medical students, residents, you know, they have historically needed to keep some kind of logs of the types of cases they've seen or the procedures they've done. Um it used to be you'd keep a literally a paper log, you know, I just did procedure X and I got a, you know, here's the date I did it and you know, that eventually moved to some, you know, some other electronic platform, but you'd still have to go and type it out. Um, and so, you know, people are, especially when they're training and in in practice, there's not a whole lot of time to go and sit down and type those things out. And so, the question is, can we just use AI, generative AI to read through the chart and say, okay, this procedure was done and it creates the log or the case mix log to make sure that the the students are getting the appropriate exposures and training they need. That's that's pretty low stakes, not super exciting. But I will say there are all kinds of other use cases both in in learning for medical students before they start seeing patients like in the first two years or so of medical school and in their last couple years when they're seeing patients. And I will say whether um whether we like it or not, the students are leading us where the future is is going to be. They are all already using AI in some in some way. And so it really becomes incumbent upon us as the educators to figure out how do we put some reasonable safeguards in place and guard rails and make sure that that they're using these things in responsible ways. Um one of uh you know one of the interesting use cases that's somewhat administrative but is also helpful for teaching is to look at to try to figure out from like notes let's say a medical student has written and ascertain can we determine what their clinical reasoning process is. Now historically that would be very time inensive. You have a attending physician look over the note that a student wrote and then sit down with them and say, "Okay, from this note, here's what it looks like your clinical reasoning is and here's some of the opportunities, some of the challenges, but could we have AI do that assessment on each and every note?" And then maybe generate what we call tutor bots. So like an AI generated case to help with certain areas that were weaknesses um to help teach to teach that that learner um in a in a scalable way. And so those types of things are are also coming too. But what I will say and this is an area of particular interest and concern is uh this thing called deskkilling. And so what I mean by that is um I don't know if the last time you drove in a car that did not have a backup camera, but if your car has a backup backup camera, you probably have gotten used to it starting to beep loudly at you if you're about to back up and hit something. And then if you've been doing that for years and you get into a car without a backup camera, you might just back up and wait for the beeps and not realize those beeps aren't going to come. You have been deskskilled in your backup skills. Uh, and so the question is if learners are relying on AI to do things for them, are they going to deskkill or might they be never skill in the first place? Um and there was a study that came out just um like a week ago uh about um the use of uh videography assisted AI in colonoscopies with uh gastrointestinal physicians who have been doing colonoscopies for years having three months of usage of AI assisted colonoscopy where on the screen the AI is detecting polyps and after three months of using AI they were then exposed to either not AI or with AI colonoscopies and found that these physicians who had been doing this for decades deskkilled. They had become so reliant on the AI that when they were not using the AI assisted colonoscopy there they were detecting fewer polyps than when they were using it. So it's a real concern and medical educators are thinking a lot through how do we make sure that not only the skills developed in the first place but that once AI tools are used that we don't lose these skills. >> Yeah, it's interesting. I actually spent some time talking to a company in that very specific space of using imaging for uh for assisting with colonoscopies and they were showing me how um basically on the video screen it would highlight what was the polip and it would tell you whether it was cancer or not. It had a whole bunch of metrics on the back end. And a big part of the value proposition and argument was is like the first colonoscopy of the day when you're feeling fresh and you had your coffee in the morning is a lot better than the last colonoscopy of the day when you're tired and you want to just go home. And that this would introduce new standards and a better and higher standard throughout the process. And based on what you're saying, it sounds like the people who are taking advantage of that text may actually be desilling themselves. So it makes me wonder, is that a bad thing or a good? Like how do we judge that? Right? If it's better with AI, but that makes the humans a little bit less good, but it's still better with AI, is that still okay? Or is it bad that the humans got less good at what they were doing in the first place because they got the assist? >> Well, let me ask you this. Like if you if you were to get on an airplane and there's AI somehow assisting the pilot and now it makes travel safer, but let's say the systems go down. Do you want your pilot desk? So, you know, I'd say the same thing like in medicine. You know, these are sometimes life and death type of activities and decisions. And so maintaining skills, establishing them in the first place and maintaining them, I would argue, is probably super important. even though when everything is going right with these tools, they may in fact make us better. Um and and so some health systems especially, you know, where trainees are are learning are thinking about well maybe in the first year of training as residents um we don't let them use any AI tool because they have got to develop these skills in the first place and then only turning on the availability of some of these AI tools when they're perhaps in their second year of residency. But I don't think that there is a standard yet and different health systems have different tolerance for when they make these tools available. >> When you started talking about the plane, it made me think of if the AI makes the plane safer, I definitely want the AI helping the pilot fly it. But I also want that pilot to go in a simulator when I'm not on the plane and do some flights without any AI on a regular basis just in case it, you know, co-pilot doesn't work out. Um, you know, one of the other areas in medical education, you and I both spent some time in this space. I was thinking recently about evidence-based guidelines, right, and the practice of care and the fact that the longer we seem to go, the more guidelines people seem to come up with. And the guidelines change pretty frequently and the volume of medical knowledge continues to just like mushroom cloud. It is just out to the point where I do not believe that anybody is consuming any like even a fraction of the amount of information and new data that's coming out. And so, you know, in some ways the best practices lag the knowledge that may be okay because we want to harden the knowledge. But even when we get to the best practices groups, just thinking of all the medical societies are all publishing guidelines at different times, some of which conflict with each other. Many times we have multiple societies who feel that they have you know authority over often the same area. Is there any thought about education and the hospital systems about their own protocols and breast practice? I'm assuming a provider system has to decide based on their own clinical insights and their own clinical expertise what they believe is the right standard of care for them to exercise in the hospital. Is that an opportunity for education as well? >> Yeah, I think so. And and you're right about the volume of medical knowledge. There's no way for any individual to stay on top of all of it. I'll say like, you know, larger health systems benefit by having committees which are meant to try to stay on top of guidelines and decide what what they're going to implement or things of that sort, but those are those are, you know, the exception to the rule. There are plenty of small health systems, rural health systems where they just those resources aren't available. And so, can AI potentially help guide the clinician to the latest practice guidelines? Yes, absolutely. And in fact, I have a project right now where we're looking at um uh at trying to help physicians um adhere to best practice guidelines. Um because again, there's there is the volume of information and knowledge is so massive, it's impossible for people to stay on top of. >> That was actually where I was I was going in my head. I was wondering if you could look at the episode of care. So, and and maybe I'm the wrong way, but if you look at a patient's care journey, whether it be through one institution or one encounter or not, could you actually find all the places that care deviated from this what's considered the best practice standard of care and use that as a learning mechanism? There's lots of reasons, right, why you don't do exactly the same thing. You know, my wife works in a hospital and she'll always tell me that like you have no idea what's going to happen next, right? I assume you have the same experience and sometimes you have to call whatever you're going to do just based on whatever happens and then you need to figure out how to you know remedy the situation. Certainly that that's individual right in the situation itself but is that an idea of actually looking at overall quality and content of care and then creating is is that an education opportunity then? >> Yes. Um so part of what I work on is um is called diagnostic excellence and that's looking at you know how can we how can we help clinicians continuously improve in their diagnostic performance and the the analogy I think of is like if you are a professional football player you can bet that after last Sunday's game you are reviewing the footage and learning from what you did well what you didn't do well to improve your your next game and you see that over and over again. You see it in in almost every industry and not in healthcare. Why is that? Well, it's hard to know especially for diagnosis like did you get a diagnosis right or not? Um there isn't necessarily always a gold standard but even when there is um there isn't like a system in place. There isn't there aren't dashboards in place to say hey Dr. Rosner, you got, you know, 84 of those diagnoses correct, but then there's 16 you didn't. And these are the ones that you need to learn from to get better. I'm actually working with several medical specialty societies right now that are actually building dashboards looking at um clinician adherence to diagnostic practice guidelines. So, what those mean is like if you're if you're diagnosing X, Y, and Z, are you doing all the right steps necessary to get to the diagnosis? And the idea being, you know, the physicians hopefully then learn um from opportunities to get better as diagnosticians. It's called recalibrating. But one of the challenges in medicine is, you know, if anybody ever comes up to me and says, "Hey, Dr. Rosner, do you remember that patient from two weeks ago?" The moment they stop there, all of a sudden I'm like, "Oh no, did did something go wrong? Did I do something wrong?" So there's a culture in medicine of not, you know, of of not wanting to be told that something didn't go right. And we need to really change that culture because at the end of the day clinicians are humans and there was a major um uh publication years ago called to air is human and clinicians will heir and but we have to learn from those errors and so creating a better culture in medicine to say here's learning opportunity just like other industries you want to learn from it so you get better and then creating also space and time for clinicians to look at those errors. Right now, our time is filled with patient encounters and there isn't time set aside to say, "Hey, you should look at your performance metrics so that you can learn how to get better." Is there a liability concern? Is there like an institutional, hey, we don't necessarily want to pinpoint all the places we deviated because those might be things where we were does that. So, I'm just picturing the lawyers in the room always spend enough time with them. Does does that is that a thing that people worry about? you know, it it possibly could be. Um, and I'm not, you know, I'm not a a healthc care lawyer, so I can't exactly speak to that, but I do think that there is sort of that lurking in the background. But, but frankly, I I don't think that burying our heads in the sand and saying I don't want to learn from past, you know, from past experience. To me, that just doesn't feel like the right approach. I mean, I think the right approach still has to be we are humans. We are not perfect but we should do everything we can to learn from from past performance. >> I 100% agree. I've actually spent some time I was pondering this a little bit is actually benchmarking. So, one of the questions that um ran into, we're doing some direct to consumer healthcare kind of decision-m is where do I go to get this procedure, right? And who should I see? And I mean, I think we all I struggle with this, right? I have something. I want to go see a doctor. I can go see one of this list of 200 people who appear in what look like a phone book. Each one's got maybe some star thing next to it that I kind of vaguely understand. But I know about a very specific question that I have and I want the expert in that question. How do I know who provides the best care for someone like me? And there that I realize is a really complex question of like what is someone like me? What is the actual problem etc. But it feels to me as much as we are trying to benchmark costs and there's been a lot of discussion about the cost of health care and better transparency in the costs and payments between that we should also be getting to a higher level of transparency right about the performance of different health care systems particularly as it relates to the decisions that we're making when we're shop we're all kind of shopping for our own healthcare here so how do I know if I'm making a good decision or not and it feels to me that this whole benchmarking education are you doing the right thing is kind of fundamental to that crosschain. >> Um so a good question. I think that um there are there are several ways that one might assess who provides the best care for what you want. One is sort of the softer metrics, right? That is sort of like health grades or vitals where you know people can post their exper sort of like sort of like Yelp for health, right? People can post their experiences or rate their doctor. Um that's one level of a of assessment. Then there are things like harder metrics. Um you know like if you're thinking about having a surgery, what is the surgical site infection rate of doctor one versus doctor 2? Um you know there have been uh some efforts in the past to try to make those data um more transparent. They were used with um with like Medicare data. So for older patients uh there was a site calledos hospitalare.gov job which I think may not be functioning anymore. >> I think I saw it I think might be up or it was up recently just I think >> okay >> um but uh but I will say as a as a country we don't do a great job with making those data more transparent because we're a very very fractured um health system. We have lots of different payers, lots of different health systems. So in countries where there's a single payer for example, it's much easier to say, you know, here are here are the performances of different, you know, different physicians. So the sort of the closest we can come to that is with some of the CMS data. But again, that's that's mainly for like our older our older populations. And if you're a younger person, you may have different coorbidities than an older patient and the metrics may not apply to you as much. >> Yeah. Yeah. I was just interested when you're talking about the individual performance of physicians as related to guidelines. It automatically took me almost in my mind to the system level performance, right? Like so if I want to go should I be going to Kaiser or UCSF or Stanford or John Mure for one particular type of care and they will all if I go and talk to them tell me how great they are um uh right about each one of the things that I want to go to but there must be performance characters and maybe actually depend on who I am how well far I'm willing to travel a lot of the soft metrics that are interesting. Well, let's um let's move on. Uh, one of the things you've been working on really is understanding API and API standards across the HR systems in healthcare. I know it's a project I think you've been working on for a while if I understand it correctly. Can you uh tell us a little bit about that? >> Sure. Yeah, API stands for application programming interface, but that's uh that's technical language for how does one computer or a computer program talk to another one and in essence speak the same language so they can pass information back and forth. So um so one of the things that um you know that has happened in the last 15 20 years as like consumer um technology became more prevalent people are very used to let's say opening up an app on their phone and ordering something from you know a food delivery service just very easy to transfer I here's some information I want to send and then I get a service delivered back so in the consumer world um digital technology is is frictionless But in healthcare there's been a lot of friction and in part you know how can information be shared between let's say a patient or let's say a digital health vendor a company that that offers digital health solutions and the electronic health record which is sort of the work environment and almost like the source of truth for everything that goes on in the health care setting. So if you're for example a company that's developed some tool that helps patients monitor their glucose or their step count or anything relating to health and you want that data to flow either into or from the electronic health record. You have to use these APIs to get the data to flow. A lot of people don't think about this but this is like all the pipes that are inside the walls of a building. You don't usually think about it. You just go to the faucet and you turn it on and water flows. But e acting all the pipes takes a lot of work and it's not always easy to do. And so we actually did a survey of digital health companies um in late 2022, but we published it last year about their experiences with using what are called standardsbased APIs to connect or integrate with these commercial electronic health records. And the reason we were interested is that the federal government uh at the time it was called the ONC the office of the national coordinator had put out policies about commercial electronic health vendors should make standardsbased APIs available. They were mandated to so that it was easier for these companies to integrate into electronic health record. But nobody had any idea did these standard work? What were the company's experiences when these things were supposedly turned on? So, so we did a national survey to try to understand it and we found that a lot of companies while they were using standardsbased APIs, the ones that sort of we want to make so that it's easier to integrate, a lot of them were still using these proprietary APIs because for some reason or other they had to do both. Um, and when they were using APIs, there were still lots of barriers like high cost, um, difficulty finding what are called API endpoints, like where where do we send or extract the data from, uh, and things of those sorts. So, it's been a couple years since that survey and we're actually gearing up do another one that we will be launching this winter to see has the needle moved on federal policy and trying to make it easier for these companies to integrate into electronic health record. >> Well, you probably saw a couple weeks ago the big push from CMS, right, with the different networks pledging to support and a big part of that initiative is actually to make healthcare data available. I'm particularly excited myself to see um individual access services or an ability for individuals, right, like myself to authorize another application to access my health record and actually be able to find that because I think for far too long people have been trying to get their medical records all in one place just as individuals like particularly if I have a complex or rare disease and we see you know people walking around with bankers boxes is full of paper records still and printouts from different things. And that's just not how we should do things in a modern digital age. But I don't think we've had the technology or even if we had the technology, we didn't have the governance systems really to to establish who had to share what with whom and why and where and in what standard form. And so even if we all agreed it was a good idea, we didn't have an agreed method for this exchange. So I'm pretty excited. Um what was the results of the first survey? You said it was that people were still kind of running standards but then they had their own proprietary APIs. Was there a sense that things were moving towards more standardization or was it still a very fractured field? Yeah, it was pretty fractured. Um and you know the timing of that first survey just happened to be um just months after the mandate from something called the 21st Century Cures Act went into effect. So we probably would not have seen a whole lot of effect yet because the deadline for these commercial electronic health record vendors to implement these things was right upon us as that survey went out. So, in a way, that survey sort of set a a baseline and the survey we're about to launch this winter um will actually show us has the needle moved at all since the 21st century cures act mandates went into effect and then where might we need to focus future policy attention to help continue to take the friction out of the system. >> Yeah, totally agree. So, tell us about you're running the new survey now. if someone felt like it was something they wanted to participate in or they were interested in, how would they get involved? Is this something that other groups and companies can get involved in? >> Yeah, we actually have a um a pre-registration website. These are for uh intended for digital health companies um that integrate into electronic health record. We plan to probably disseminate that survey um in the winter of uh of 202526. >> Got it. Wonderful. Well, thank you so much, Ben. It was awesome having you on the show. It's always great to talk to you. Um, I learn so much every time I speak with you. So, this is really great. Thank you so much. >> Thank you too, Mika. I enjoyed it. [Music]