Title: Ambient Voice Technology: A game-changer for the NHS? Part 1
Channel: Health Innovation Yorkshire & Humber
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UXugBwSGd2M
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

Rendle is here. So if you have specific questions, um Sarah, I'm sure we'll be delighted um to to talk about um Health Innovation Northeast and North Cumbria. I'm going to move on now, but the link for the questionnaire um is in the chat and I'm sure we can paste it again, but please do just take a moment um to to to complete it. So as I said, we were absolutely overwhelmed by the interest in this event. I don't think I've seen quite so many um registrations um for an online event. Um and it's fantastic to see you all. And the reason um one of the reasons we decided to hold this event simply is because of that huge amount of um chat, publicity, talk about the promise um of ambient voice technologies, how people are using them, how they're not using them, what the potential um implications and uh opportunities they offer. But one of the things we've also heard a lot um over the last few weeks is a sense of the cat out of the bag. Lots of people are already doing it perhaps um without thinking about some of the wider implications and lots of people want to do it with maybe not um always confident in in some of the support and and the things they might need in place to be able to adopt it. So the phrases we've heard are yep cat out of the bag. Uh genie's already out of the bottle. Um but also maybe more kind of worryingly how it's a wild um west out there for ambient voice tech. Now, we know lots of guidance um has come out recently and we've got George from NHS England later talking um us through um the NHS developed guidance. There was also a letter that came out uh last week from Alec Price Forbes uh national clinical information officer reminding um NHS organizations about uh the regulations and and what might need to be what should be in place um when adopting um ambient voice technology and scribes but also lots of conversation on social media and lots of publications about the need for evidence um uh and understanding of some of the wider implications. So this event has really been designed to spend a bit of time um in the morning talking through the guidance, learning from others who have already started um implementing ambient voice technology, thinking about some of the clinical regulations um that need to be in place and how that might be tackled um um and also to hear from from others um for example um this institute around work they're doing around development of an evaluation framework. So the idea really being spending a morning to think about what do we need to know, what are the questions we need to ask, what has to be in place and then an afternoon to hear from four um suppliers of ambient voice technology and scribes that are in the marketplace. Um so a chance to put some of that newly acquired um knowledge um into uh practice in the afternoon um by hearing from them and an opportunity to kind of question them on how they're meeting this guidance. Now I should say we selected four suppliers. There are lots of suppliers out in the marketplace as you'll be more than aware. We selected these four um because they're already um in use um across the the uh the north uh east and humb region. Um but just a kind of reiteration that we can't take any responsibility for any of the kind of the claims made. They've been selected as examples, but there are others out there. So please do um yeah consider that when you're you're deciding what you might want to adopt. So I'm just going to say a couple of words about the health innovation networks. Um hopefully you're familiar with us. Um there are 15 of us um across England. Um I am from Health Innovation York Humber and there are colleagues on the call both from Health Innovation Northeast in North Cumbria and I think from several of the other health innovation networks um across the country. So we were set up really to think about how can we accelerate innovation and research into practice um for greater pay patient but also uh workforce and benefit. Uh we think about some of those national challenges. Um, but the beauty of having 15 of us is we can really spend time with our uh local populations, local NHS to get to the heart of of local challenges and think about how we bring um that local context when we're thinking about how we adopt um some great innovations um and what might be most appropriate and beneficial for our populations. We see ourselves as that honest broker. So thinking about how do we bridge that gap between um uh companies industry but also healthcare and what the system and our patients need. I'm not going to spend too much time talking about this um but from a personal perspective we're really interested around how do we make innovation work? What are the conditions that are needed to ensure that um the promise benefits do deliver? And that's part of the reason for this event today. how can we really learn from you about what makes on voice technology and scribes work in practice. So um I will stop talking now but I'm just going to do a quick run through um of the agenda. So as I said the morning is really around um learning um thinking about the new guidance that um has been produced what support there is out there and to learn from others who are already um implementing ambient voice technology. We'll have a a break halfway through the morning. We'll also have a a short break for lunch and in the afternoon we've got four suppliers um who have about half an hour each to kind of do a demonstration with some time um for you for for questions. Um so quick run through of the agenda. Um we've got Joyce who will remind us of of why we're here um to think about that patient and public um uh perspective. George has kindly joined us from the NHS team um who who wrote the guidance. We've got two primary care um colleagues. Um so Dr. Mike Smith um from uh Northeast uh and North Cumbria um talking about the practical um things that will need to be in place when we think about clinical governance for ambient voice technology and then a fantastic example from Dr. Andy Noble from the Gene Bishop Integrated Care Center where they've implemented ID health. We'll then have a short break um and then a chance to hear from Professor Neils Peak from the Healthcare Improvement Studies Institute about the work they're doing both to create a kind of a community of practice um in uh for this but also um what might you need to consider when we're thinking about evaluation. We've then got a chance for a bit of discussion. Please do stay on. I know the temptation is to jump off when we get to breakout groups, but really to a learn from others and have a discussion about what outstanding questions you might still have um for this. We'll have a lunch break um and then we'll go into the supplier demonstrations. So, I'm going to stop sharing now hopefully um and I'm going to ask Joyce um just to give um a public um perspective um on the potential and implications for ambient voice technology. So, thank you. Thanks Joyce. >> Hello everyone. It's good to be with you today. Uh just a little bit about me before I uh to explain maybe why Laura asked me to to say something before I go into the uh bit about uh the public and ABT. Uh 13 years ago after 30 years of working in teaching and training I had to give up work due to ongoing and increasing health difficulties. I found it difficult to get suitable and timely support and care and I did not feel that I was truly heard or the impact of my situation understood. But this led me into working with charities that support patients to live well with health conditions. So I have I still retain that input and have lots of sort of contact with patients. And it also led me into patient and public involvement roles. Uh I I really wanted to ensure that patients could have a say well a say in and also help to shape the things that ultimately impact them and their care. So I was delighted when Laura asked me to speak today. um artificial intelligence, AI in general and uh in including ambient voice technologies, AVTs are really developing fast and I know very little about them, but they will most definitely impact on patient care. Yet the general public know very little about how these can be used within health and care or how they might impact them. And in conversations, recent conversations since Laura asked me that I've had with patient groups, local communities, and networks, I started asking for people's views about the use of AVT in healthcare. I wonder if you are also having direct and ongoing conversations with patients, carers, and the public about your plans for using AVT. In my conversations, most people had no idea about AVT or that it was being introduced into healthcare situations. And there was often an element of fear and suspicion. And after a brief explanation to my sort of limited capabilities that I was able to give to them, people had a range of responses. For example, a 90-year-old stroke survivor who uses voice recognition software on his phone to help him in his daily life after having had the stroke. and a 75-year-old retired program manager who during his career had been responsible for chairing meetings and writing meeting summaries. They both quickly recognize the value that AVT could have to health professionals and patients. A group of charity administrators expressed concern about data security and referred to recent public data breaches. and a small group of teenagers, several who had mental health difficulties. They said they felt uneasy about their personal conversations being listened to and the uncertainty of what would happen to their data in future. The conversations highlighted a sort of complex interplay of concerns and queries regarding ethical, practical, and emotional factors. Now, the wider public will bring many more perspectives. They'll bring aspirations for for AVT and they'll have concerns regarding AVT's use and the use of AI more generally. So, it's imperative that you engage with people to explore their views. And within such discussions, people will value you being open and transparent and being prepared to have those difficult conversations. This all helps to demonstrate to people that you are trustworthy and that you will be responsible custodians of their digital data as you increasingly introduce AI solutions across healthcare. However, if you don't engage effectively with the public about the use of ABT, you will leave a growing number of unanswered questions and concerns with mistrust and doubt about its reliability and safety. So ensure you take people with you on the journey to embed AVT and other AI tools in healthcare. Patients, carers and the public are actually potential powerful advocates for you and your plans for AI and AVT. Patient pull can encourage innovation adoption and the support and confidence shown by patient advocates for what you are doing can also help strengthen wider public acceptance. However, to engage and involve patients, carers, and the public effectively, you will need to adequately resource the communications engagement and involvement functions because it takes time, lots of time to build trusting relationships with people in communities. Among other things, you will need to consider staffing and funding. PPIE is so often underfunded and often exists on the shoestring. But I really do believe this is a false economy. How much will you allocate to these key functions so that they can operate effectively supporting you in what you are doing and ensuring you build and sustain public support bringing the public with you on the on this journey. I realize that many of you are doing involvement and engagement already often on an individual use case and location scenario. I ask you all to consider this might be an opportunity to collaborate and develop a shared approach which will improve communications and understanding about the use of ABT and more generally AI in health and care. If so, what would this look like? So that it serves innovators and the organizations supporting them, health care professionals and commissioners adopting AI in their work, and people and communities within your region. How will you ensure you hear public views from across the region? Urban, rural and coastal communities, different ages ethnicities socioeconomic backgrounds, and seldom heard groups. Each will have different experiences of health care and will see the introduction of AI tools, including AVT, from different perspectives. So the sooner in the process you engage with the communities and the people you seek to serve and the more open and transparent you are about plans for AI and AVT, the greater the potential for earning public trust and gaining their support and acceptance of new technologies that will benefit patients, health care professionals, and the wider health care system. So I look forward to working with you and traveling with you on this exciting journey. And thank you for listening to me today. Thank you so much, Joyce. I really um appreciate your time. I think you said a couple of really interesting things. Um well, many interesting things, but the the two kind of highlights for me, the the trust, how do we build trust in these systems? And you talked about that suspicion at the start where people weren't quite clear about what it was and then moving to a kind of an understanding and potential benefits. I really love the idea of that shared approach to um public engagement on AVT rather than us all duplicating the wheel, but how do we get to a really grounded um understanding? So, huge thank you and I'm sure there'll be lots of questions and thoughts um on this um patient consent. I know is part of the new guidance. I'm now going to ask George um to come in and talk through the NHS England guidance that was recently published. I can't see on screen, but are you there, George? I am here. Thanks very much, Laura. Um, I'm just uh give me a second if that's okay, just to upload the the slides. >> Thank you. So, while George is doing so, if along the day you have questions, please do feel free to put them in the chat and we'll try and make as much time um as possible after each session for questions from the audience. So, Oh, brilliant. George, >> have they come up? >> Yes, they have. I can see them. >> Oh, okay. All right. Uh, of course my computer is slow today, but um um anyway, great. Thanks so much for um giving me this opportunity to speak with you. I would also like to thanks Joyce for that uh that important steer uh that that she has given us. So I am George Onoru. I am part of the AI adoption support team that sits across NHS England and the department of health and social care. And part of our focus is to develop guidance and resources that can help the safe uh and effective update of AI technologies in the NHS. And as part of our work, uh we have released guidance last month that you may have seen on adopting ambient scribbing products that I will uh take you through today. I should say that um I won't be discussing uh specific products or or systems other than as as indicated examples and I won't be able to give you advice on on on questions that relate to specific products and and circumstances. The purpose of this presentation is uh just to share with you the information that is provided in the guidance. So what what are we talking about? You may already be very familiar with these technologies. Uh they are widely used particularly in primary care but it might be good just to provide a quick overview so we are all on the same page. Um essentially ambient scribing products which some call ambient scribes or AI scribes and they do include ambient voice technologies or AVTs. So these products they use advanced speech technology which is now supercharged uh by generative AI and large language models to listen quietly uh and capture the conversation between a professional and a patient and then they transform it into structured documentation. So all without the the uh professional um taking their eyes off the patient and of course the NHS has been using dictation systems for a while but previously those tools could only transcribe uh ambient scribes go further than that. They can summarize they can populate the electronic record um they can even draft letters or or referrals using that that same audio. Um now the fact that they can have many functions is really important. Um perhaps it is the most important characteristic of these products. Um and you should understand and clarify these functions before adopting them. the different functionalities relate to different types of uh risks involved as I'm sure you understand and by extension to the safety and regulatory requirements um as well as considerations on on on how these products can be integrated with existing infrastructure and systems. So um for example functions like suggesting tasks or or or even clinical actions are obviously higher risk and you know they should be considered differently to say a simple summarization uh of of the consultation. Um so you you should always return to the agreed intended purpose of the product and ask you know does this functionality go be beyond that? Um now this type of clarification and and the need to support settings uh that are considering adopting ambient scribes is what drove us to develop the guidance uh that we released last month. Um and we released the first two documents of what will eventually be a series of documents aimed at different considerations and audiences. You can see the link there that takes you to what we publish. I can share this later in the chat if helpful. Um and just to say that you know the first available document is very brief and high level at least aimed at senior leaders and board members mostly just to make the case for change and and outline the the benefits. And then the second document which is longer and and more comprehensive is aimed at chief information officers and chief clinical information officers who are leading the adoption of of new technologies at their settings. Um and I will provide an overview of the contents in a bit. Um but first as I mentioned these are only the first installments. Over the next few months, we will update this documents and publish further guidance particularly on information governance considerations. Um, and that will include a model data potential impact assessment and sample hazard logs. Um and just to preempt some of the questions that you may have on that and and I guess just to address some of the points that Joyce raised, um we expect that the document uh will provide further guidance on on information governance um to to have clarifications around your obligations under information law. So things like lawful basis for processing uh data, things like patient consent, transparency, which is really important, uh checking for accuracy uh and reckon retention, uh as well as the individual rights under UK GDPR like the right to object and the right to access. Um and as I said, we we also plan to provide a sample DPIA. So this we anticipate to be ready sometime next uh next month. Um and we also want to clarify what good assurance of these products looks like. So we are working on a suggested approach that uh we will be published to assist you. So in short there will be more more practical tools uh coming. Um, now in relation to the guidance that is already available, I would encourage you of course to to have a look at the document if you haven't done so already. But what I'll do for the rest of the presentation is provide a brief snapshot. And what you see here uh summarizes the benefits of MBNC products uh which are outlined in that brief overview document for executives. These um are emerging benefits from existing trials and there are many across the system. The largest one uh is conducted and you you may be aware of this in London and is led by the great Orman Street Hospital um and is expected to be finalized uh this month with sort of the the findings becoming available within the next few months. Um so what we are seeing with uh uh sort of the evidence emerging from the trials is that u you know by automating uh documentation these products can cut down the time that healthcare professionals spend on on paperwork. Um and then with the AI doing most of the documentation, uh professionals can can can obviously give their patients their full attention uh during the discussions instead of um you know having to focus on their computers and and typing. Um, and I'm sure you understand that this can enhance the the face toface interaction and patient satisfaction with uh with these consultations and essentially um you know that that can lead into strengthening the the you know the connections between patients and healthare professionals but also um you know as important but by minimizing the the workload uh ambient scribes could shorten the the effective consultation time or the time needed after the the visit for for for the documentation and you can see that over time this could lead to cost savings. Um these projects could also potentially produce more more comprehensive and standardized nodes than manual entries uh which you know could lead to better decision making and continuity of care. Ultimately these benefits you know point to better patient care but also operational efficiency. Um okay now from from a practical perspective if you are an adopter the guidance asks you to begin with five critical moves and and hopefully this will resonate with what you already do. The first one is to appoint a clinical safety officer who will map the involved hazards uh that these products introduce and um you know you you should be aware that products that use generated AI can produce errors in their outputs. So you know this needs to be mitigated accordingly. Um and that that takes us to the second step which involves you know completing your DCP 0160 safety case alongside a data protection assessment. The third step is about planning integration early uh ensuring the product can talk to your main IT infrastructure uh you know your systems and and workflows particularly the electronic patient record system. Um the fourth step is about locking down firm controls. So clarifying whether the product is a medical device uh considering related stuff training and making sure that every output is reviewed by a human. Um I'm going to pause here around the the regulatory considerations. So we worked with MH to provide the the statement that's included in the guidance and essentially that ambient scribbing products that inform medical decisions and use generative AI for anything other than basic transcription um would likely be medical devices. Um we have heard since the um the guidance has been published that it will be helpful to provide further clarification on this including what specific classification would apply to each functionality that ambient scribes have given that this um you know this is not explicitly said in the guidance. So we are in the process of finalizing um you know official wording uh from NH in relation to this. But you may have seen the letter um from the national chief clinical information officer um that um uh that that Laura mentioned at the beginning asking that any products uh that perform summarization require class one medical device status and then anything further than that like generative diagnosis will need a class 2 a. As I mentioned, we will publish this clarification as part of updating uh the guidance which was always intended as a sort of like an iterative document. Um okay. And just to just to return to the five steps, the last one involves implementing a monitoring framework with audits, incident reporting, and performance dashboards so problems are are spotted and and fixed fast. Okay, so this is this is sort of like our final slide. The the five highlevel steps that I just described are complemented in the guidance by more detailed considerations that that fall within these 10 areas that you can see. Um I will summarize what what each consideration include. And as I mentioned, please see the guidance for for more more details. and and there's there's quite a bit in in in the appendices. Um so the first area is around risk identification and assessment. Um and and and what the ask there is to complete risk safety and data protection assessments and just to ensure that your suppliers meet relevant standards like the DCB um uh 0129. Then around regulatory compliance that's about determining if the product qualifies as a medical device and I've just mentioned that you know we developed that that section in collaboration uh with MH and it will be updated soon. Um then data complies and security is about engaging early with um your IG and cyber security teams just to ensure compliance with UK GDPR um and also um with the data security and protection toolkit. Integration and performance is about um you know defining your integration needs um um in relation to your electronic health record systems and then you know setting clear performance expectations. Portability scalability and flexibility is about choosing systems that support um what it says data portability and you know that they can scale and and adapt to future healthcare demands. Support and maintenance uh is about planning for long-term maintenance with with clear service uh level agreements. Um supplier engagement and procurement is about you know clearly defining your needs uh uh at first and then you know um what is recommended is to use accredited NHS procurement frameworks to ensure compliance. uh then monitoring and bias mitigation. This is about continuously monitoring the the product's performance and addressing potential biases especially um in in speech recognition across diverse user groups. Perhaps I should pause here as well even on on on some points that that that Joyce mentioned uh previously. Um it is important to acknowledge that that any AI can have biases for example and and and you know um ambient scribes as well for example um you know struggling with with with certain uh accents or or dialects. Um so the guidance explicitly advises checking that the product works for different accents and dialects and and monitoring as well uh for for such users. Um different patient groups may also react in different ways in relation to the use of of AI and and NMBB and scribes in their care. So it is important to um you know be be transparent but but also monitor whether any uh patient groups may hesitate uh to seek your services due to to these products or or any impact of the dynamics and the quality between um you know those patient uh professional interactions due to the the princes the presence of NBN scribes. I guess the key message here is that you know the technology should solve or or or patients equitably and any problems in that regard should be actively managed rather than than than sort of put aside. Okay. Now now back to the the 10 areas. Um the ninth one is about user training uh wi-i which again is quite an important one that's about providing training on on the effective use and and uh reinforcing the need for practitioners to review and validate uh AI generated outputs. And then finally the the last one uh under liability you should note that um you know energies uh organizations may still be liable for any claims arising out of the the use of AI products. Uh and there's more detail on that in the the guidance. So I will I will just stop here as this kind of highlevel summary uh of the guidance. Um and and I guess the the message to leave you is that um you know with MBNC scribing products they do have potential to to uh to be transformative uh but you know we do need to implement them safely and compliantly with robust uh human oversight and the guidance is there to support um along with the the the forthcoming documents that I mentioned. Um, yes, happy to take any any questions. >> Fantastic. Thank you so much, George. Hugely comprehensive and really helpful to have that last slide that breaks down each of those different steps and considerations. So, there are some questions I can see. So, there's one in the chat um already from Chris Weevil. Have any of the trials delivered efficiency benefits, good return on investment that you are aware of? Um my thought is that a lot of the discussion is around extra auditing, extra assurance processes and it feels like time, effort saved and be consumed by these extra asurances. >> Yeah. No, that's that's a good point and it's definitely something that we uh we want evidence uh um for uh and and we want to capture in um in sort of like our ongoing monitoring of of these uh uh products. So you know there is a number of studies uh there's even some some published articles uh to kind of support the the transformative opportunity of avts um and I mentioned the the study that the great Orman Street uh hospital are leading which is a multi-side uh trial um and um you know it's been done with over sort of safe 7,000 uh patients uh across primary care community hospitals and and and sort of mental health trust. Um so we are expecting the um uh the official numbers from that trial within within a month and and hoping to share that. So that could help others in in sort of like building that that case and addressing some uh some of these u concerns. Um yeah, >> fantastic. Thank you. Can't wait to see the outputs from um the Great Orman Street work. Um Bob, you've got your hands up. Bob Weller. >> Hi. I was just going to ask a question about that last slide really because you you've not really mentioned evaluation. I don't know whether it's implied through the monitoring and bias mitigation uh aspect of it. But some of these some of these devices in my experience they don't work or they don't work in certain settings, certain environments, certain populations. So where does that fit in? >> I mean I I would like to take this conversation with you Rob as well just to understand um sort of your you know your your insights around where where you think it doesn't work. Um but um part of um I I guess the um the approach that uh um we are expecting uh settings to to follow is to understand the the the type of of of impact and the benefits that that these uh technologies can have. um and and and also part of the the existing trials and the evidence that is being um captured is is around that. So um you know we do want to make sure that um these products can provide benefits for for everyone and in each setting. Chris, >> just a follow-up question that's come up in the chat from Simon at Burnro Medical mentioning about um GD practices having access to level IT support. Um obviously the guidance is really comprehensive, but there is an element um where it says um if you're stuck, contact your ICB digital teams or your ICB teams. Um makes sense, but obviously as an ICB digital team, I'm going the way of the dodo by October. um we we've been eliminated in the model ICB blueprint. So the guidance is going to have to potentially be tweaked to to sort of forward that along. But the the point there about clinical safety officers and um IT support for primary care is is a good point. Do you know of any support out there a regional or national level to help these people out um and and actually to help us as ICB teams out while we're still here? So uh I mean obviously this is this is something that and I did mention that the guidance is iterative uh but you know that is a good point and it's something that we need to monitor and understand in terms of how best uh this support can be provided to uh to primary care. Um there is uh a program of you know a broad a broader program of work that is looking into capturing sort of the the the requirements and capabilities that are needed to scale uh and being scribes across the NHS. So this is something that uh we need to take into consideration. In terms of IG, there is within the guidance uh um sort of a a contact um to clarify some some some concerns like a central contact for uh the IG team to to clarify for some of those concerns. Um so um yeah we're we're probably looking into clarifying further within the next uh iteration of the guidance perhaps specifically around it as well. >> Thanks really helpful to note that it's iterative um and to keep referring back to that and presumably will that be well communicated out or do we just keep coming back to the NHS England website to check for updates? So the the updates will be published in uh the the link that uh I will just say but we uh we do intend to also continue our our engagement and communications uh particularly with some key networks like the CIOS and and their uh the meetings that they have. Um yeah >> thank you. Um so another question in the chat if that's okay George um from Amanda is there any evidence on patient feedback on their experiences of consultations using AI particularly around um nonclinical settings? So as I said um this this sort of uh feedback and evidence is being captured as part of several uh several trials and we are looking to um um sort of published them when when it's sort of packaged in a way. Um I think I think what's what's important to uh I guess reiterate again is um um and and what the guidance as well um makes clear is uh to ensure clinical safety and and and and data um sort of security uh which I guess uh addresses our our responsibilities towards patients but as well as as Joyce said to sort of continuing engaging with patients and uh and and sort of like understanding their their perspectives. So um um I I guess what I'm saying is like you know it's important to understand there is through research and trials but it is an ongoing process as well of sort of getting um getting patient feedback. >> Thank you. Um another question in the chat from the trial what were the risks identified in terms of output from generative AI for example hallucinations and so on. Yeah. So the risks um which which in you can sort of like see as well a little bit in the in the guidance uh you know there's some safety risks around um accuracy as you mentioned so potential errors uh in the transcription um especially when it's kind of uh complex clinical terminologies or or or as I mentioned some some um sort of speech conditions. Um there's also as well contextual understanding um you know potentially mis misinterpretation of of the clinical context which could lead to sort of like uh documentation errors. Um as well as completeness. So you know making sure that there's no gaps in in in in the documentation that could compromise sort of uh patient care. Um if we if we look at sort of like the the broader uh concerns the you know it is also about data and cyber security risks. So you know potentially uh data leakage u you know in terms of uh the integrity and confidentiality of user data and that's why we have the processes that that uh that that we um uh encourage. Um um then of course there's regulatory compliance uh which is based on the intended use um and that's what we we were trying to to clarify um bias and and performance that that that I mention um you know there could be bias in in outputs and that's why ongoing monitoring is sort of required um yeah so there's the there's several risks that that can be understood as part of of the risk assessment uh process and and and u you know standards like the DCB 060 and the data impact assessment. >> Great. Thank you. Any final questions from the audience? I can't see any hands up but please do shout if I've missed you. Otherwise, just to flag a comment from Jason Patrick who's um highlighted that they're on their third pilot, but highlighted a return on investment, the 70% reduction on working through lunch, evening to catch up over time. Um so benefit for clinicians well-being versus the financial savings, which absolutely kind of speaks for me to the heart of why um this is this is, you know, the opportunities here are so are so huge. Jason, I don't know if you want to say anything more to that, but thank you for sharing um that experience. In which case, we've come to 10:45. So, George, a huge, huge thank you for your time this morning. Um, and for the really insightful, comprehensive presentation. Um, I'm sure everyone's found it incredibly helpful. So, thank you for the time. Um, and we will share um the slides after the event. So, a huge thank you. >> Thanks very much. >> Thank you. So that takes us on to our next um speaker who's going to talk to um really the questions that were flagged around kind of the support for primary care and the steps that are needed to go through um when adopting ambient voice technology. So I'm going to invite Dr. Mike Smith to uh speak and to introduce himself fully at the start. Mike, I can't see you on the screen, but I'm hoping you're there. >> Oh, here we go. Fantastic. >> Hi there. So I'm going to share some slides. um which hopefully will show for everyone. Um uh Sam it's failing. Um so yeah, I'm Mike Smith. I'm a GP, but I'm also one of the associate chief clinical informatics officers in the Northeast and North Cumbria ICB. So going the way of the dinosaurs, as Chris said. Um but for now, trying to do what what I can and what we can to try and support um support these sorts of endeavors. Now, the the the points Chris and Simon have raised about primary care has been a big concern of mine, not at least because I am a GP myself um and have seen lots of practices going ahead with ambient tools often without the the recommended approach that George has highlighted above. And I think the recommended approach is very um very what's the right word? It's very heavy. um but it is necessarily heavy because this is a really novel technology and I think it can be distilled to a slightly more manageable level. My personal view is that they there is a lack of support for primary care in terms of IT support and expertise in this area and one of the big challenges for primary care is that really to safely implement technology you've got to be within that environment. So being a external person jetted in to say this is how to safely do it is very difficult because you don't know the intricacies of that practice. So the way the way the systems are designed and where the the guidance is designed is on the basis that the clinical safety officer the expert who's supporting this is actually embedded within the organization and is a clinician who works in that organization. So in a way in a general practice environment that does get very difficult in a small in a very small practice. Thankfully, with PCNs and larger practices becoming more common, it's likely that there will be somebody with the skills, interest, and expertise to get involved. So, this is my attempt at distilling the DCB0160, the terribly named clinical safety guidelines um that are recommended to try and make them more approachable and manageable. So, I'm going to focus on that element. I'm not going to go into the GDPR side of things and the require requirement for data protection impact assessments as they're well I think most practices will be familiar with those and most people will be familiar with those and it's a slightly separate thing. It's more about the data risk. This I'm going to focus more on the clinical risk. So here we're looking at how we can make sure the tools that we're using in this case ambient is safe and effective and not putting patients at risk. So like I said before the key the way the way the guidance is is written in law is that essentially this is the responsibility of the implementing organization and therefore a clinical safety planning process needs to be done by that organization. ICBS can provide some technical advice and support where there's resource to do so and as as was already mentioned by Chris the resource is limited but they can't really do it for you. They can't sign it off. It just doesn't work that way and it can't work that way. But as I say, hopefully as I go on I can demonstrate that it's not as hard as it sometimes is articulated to be. So the first things that you need to be doing and this was articulated in the letter from the national chief clinical informatics officer is that you need to be asking for a DTAC which is a digital technological assessment which is something that any vendor should be doing. So this you know the likes of tortoise Heidi Acurex they should be producing a document that is available and can be easily sent to you as a user that you can go through and check that they've done the necessary bits and pieces which are articulated in that letter from the national team and that includes a DCB0129 which is the risk assess the clinical risk assessment done by the vendor and then there's the other issue around medical device and that is its own complicated area in essence as average general practitioner I think re it's reasonable to trust that the vendor has made an appropriate judgment on the medical device status but if you get guidance to the contrary then it's it's your responsibility to challenge the vendor on that then it comes to the bit that needs to be done in the practice or in any organization which is a DCB0160 so the key outputs of this the reason this is useful to me as a GP and why I think it's important to do in any organization is that you're identifying in advance of implementing the system. What can go wrong? What are the hazards? What might befall you or your patients if you use this technology? And by thinking about what the hazards are, you can then think, how do I stop that happening and stop you ending up in a pickle down the line and your patients ending up harmed because you've implemented it in a way that's less safe. And with a novel technology like ambient where it's using AI that is poorly understood by the general population both clinical and non and the patients it really is important to think this through before you go and start using the tools. The next bit is then also to then articulate what those risks are. So what what risk is your organization taking taking in implementing this? Compare those with what are the benefits? What are the upsides? And with ambient as articul as articulated already and I'm sure in later in the day there's lots of those. So you're then weighing up risks and benefits just like we do with many decisions in practices and clinical environments and say is it worth the risks to have those benefits and often times the answer will be yes but it's important that those who are approving it for example GP partners or trust management they understand what those risks and benefits are so they can't then be held if something goes wrong down the line it doesn't then befall on an individual person that they said well you didn't tell us that this could go wrong so So it's really important to get that out of the way in advance. Now this is the my summarization of the national guidance. The national guidance is lengthy. They are looking at improving it. It's about it's about 70 pages at present and it's written in a relatively technical language that's not super understandable to me as an average GP. It took me a long time to get my head around it. But broadly speaking, these are the key points. You need a CL and I'll go into I'll go into this in a bigger screen so you can see where it's written there. So the first thing is do you need to do it? And the answer generally was something like with any digital technology that's involving patients. The answer is yes. It's written in the health and social care act of 20112 that it is a mandated part of um clinical practice. And the next bit is you need to have a clinical safety officer. So this is a clinician who has done some training and understanding how this works in terms of doing a safety process. And they also are then ultimately the ones responsible for doing for making sure it's clinically safe. So a named clinician um who is going to do that. So as I mentioned in this slide, our regional CCIOS the likes of myself can provide some support but we can't be that clinician because we're not embedded within that organization. Next is a hazard log. So, I've been developing a tool which I'm going to quickly share um to try and make this a bit easier because at the moment mostly everyone uses massive spreadsheets that I personally find utterly unusable and very challenging to navigate um to try and to try and articulate what the uh clinical risks are. So, try um so um one but actually what you're doing is a very simple process in identifying hazards and risks. So, I've developed an open- source tool that um is available as a link in the slide and it's still under development. So, not quite ready for action yet, but I can demonstrate this part of it just so people understand what it does. So, what you're doing in a hazard log is you're identifying what could go wrong. So, for AIScribe, some of the key ones are it could incorrectly summarize a consultation. It could enter you could end up entering data into the wrong record if you're copying and pasting between windows. you could fail to gain informed consent and that could lead to patients not being not not being very happy shall we say um if that's if that occurs. Um so when you're thinking about it I'm going to add another one that we know about um and that is software being used beyond the intended function. So for example a user decides to type in please give me a differential diagnosis for this consultation. That's not what the software is designed for. It's not it's not been safety tested for that. It may make lots of mistakes, but it may do it. So, a user could potentially do that because it's very difficult to put full guard rails in place within the software to prevent that. So, then you got to think about what why might that happen? Um, and um that might be because the user adds the custom prompt as I've just described. And then you want to think about what can I do to stop that? What can we as an organization do to prevent that? And in this case, it would be making sure we're training people, telling them that this can happen. Yes, you could you could type that in there, but don't because if you do, you may get useless information on the other end of it that may lead to a patient becoming harmed. So, one of the key things there is when we're going to need to put going to we recognize that cause, how we can mitigate it. We then need to think in a when you're doing a hazard log, you think about what could be the impact if that happened. So, if a user goes ahead and does that and it could lead to an incorrect treatment or incorrect advice being given. Now what level of harm is that going to cause is then the next question. So how bad could that be? So in this case it's probably a major level of harm in that it could cause death potent worst case scenario the wrong diagnosis is made the wrong treatment is given the patient leads it becomes more unwell. You know it's it could happen. It's you know there's lots of other more likely outcomes but that is definitely the worst case scenario. So then you think about that worst case scenario and if that was happening because of this hazard. So because somebody puts in the wrong prompt and you put in mitigation so you've trained people how likely is it to happen? So you've told your users don't do that. It could still happen and if it did happen it could lead to death but so how likely is death likely to occur given that you've told people not to do it but it could happen. So in this situation, you're going to say that's probably pretty rare because you'd hope that nobody's going to do it anyway. And even if they did it, it probably wouldn't lead to death. It probably wouldn't lead to any bad outcome in mo most scenarios. So therefore, you then get a calculated risk rating which is used from a risk matrix which is provided in the DCB guidance to say that that's an accept generally considered to be an acceptable level of risk. And then you get your levels of risk for all of the different things that you've thought about. And then you can articulate that to your um to your board to your partnership to say this is what risks we anticipate after having mitigated them as best we can. And then you need to think about all and then what that spits out is your mitigations. So your mitigations then essentially become your training package because training is one of the key ways you mitigate a lot of these risks. So by thinking it through carefully and getting to that point, you can get a list of things that are probably going to go wrong and what you need to tell people about and you can choose to mark you've done them and you then understand where you're going. So we did that in our ICB. provided as a template to practices as a starting point. And you end up with a very simple training package which talks about how the tool works. Things like if your microphone doesn't work, the transcript quality will suffer and things will go wrong. And then you end up with a really relatively simple training sheet that people can work through and practically minimize those risks and make those risks tolerable and manageable. So, I'm going to go back to my main slides now um to talk a bit more about um where you go from here. Sorry. Sorry about having to switch between screens. >> Uh yeah, so we talked about so that's that's the risk matrix that I was referring to there. So where you compare the likelihood versus the the severity of an impact. At the end of all that you produce a safety case report as a final step which basically you articulate what is what what you're trying to do what the purpose of this ambient tool is description of how it's going to work. Talk about the governance i.e. we've got a we've done this process. We've got a clinical safety officer. These are the these are the key hazards and levels of risks and mitigations. What are the alternatives? I think I always think it's really important to think about what that alternative option is. If you're going to do this, you again, this often ends up looking really bad. Like we've looked at a load of things that could go wrong and then the natural inclination is to go, well, we shouldn't bother. Definitely bad idea. This could all go horribly wrong. But actually, the alternative could be just as bad. Clinicians spending hours at their desk doing documentation and the documentation quality being subpar. a lot of typos, potential errors, burned out clinicians, making bad decisions is itself dangerous. So then you've got to weigh up the risks of not implementing it with the risks of doing so. And it's really important to look at the upside as well as the downside and not just focus on the bad stuff. And then you ultimately the clinician who is a clinical safety officer on the basis of that they make a recommendation on whether they think that is a tolerable level of risk and whether we should go ahead with the process. So this is that that's essentially what you do. Then you take it to your board leadership and say can we can we go ahead with this? Is this a good idea? If they say yes, you then review it on an ongoing basis. Update your hazard log if something goes wrong. So you can keep tweaking it and iterating as I think most of us do with any new process. So that is a very quick description of what needs to happen. Now I appreciate that most organizations lack the expertise at present to do that. I'm talking primary care primary care organizations but it can be achieved and I think it is achievable and actually when articulated that way it's not most of the stuff that's in there is being done it's just not been written down people do think about that when they implement processes but perhaps following that structured approach just makes it a bit more likely to to encap encapsulate everything that could go wrong and how to mitigate it. So I' I've used them on scribes so I've got some personal reflections to talk about. Um I'm just going to uh come out and get my notes. Um so the first thing I would probably say is I've felt that patients are very open to the idea when you know openly consenting patients each time you it does open the conversation sometimes um and patients talk about it and they generally are wanting to see the NHS innovate in terms of productivity and be more efficient. So patients generally even about mental health problems which are very private are generally very open to the idea because they recognize there's going to be notes taken people are comfortable for the most part with digital technologies if they're safely implemented. So I don't think it's it my experience with patients is that mostly when it's properly explained and understood they appreciate that you're trying to do best for them and they're supportive of it. But it really is important to get that open consent and some patients don't consent to it and that's absolutely fine as well and that's why that open consent process is really important. Um the other thing I feel like is the notes that are produced by the ambient tools are likely to be a lot more usable for patients than my old hand type notes which are full of abbreviations and typos. Patients use the NHS app a lot um and they're looking at their own notes. Having them readable improves clinical safety in the long term because patients could refer back to them if they didn't gather all the information in the consult. There's lots of studies that show patients don't take everything away from a consultation with them that a doctor or a nurse or another clinician recommends to them. So them being able to read it themselves in a readable form is really important. And u the one I guess I've got one negative reflection which I think is just something um each each to their own I would say but I I personally find them the ambient consultation notes not hugely helpful as a clinician for continuity. I find that the act of either dictating or writing up a consultation cementss in my memory what happened during that consult. And when I've used the ambient tools, because essentially AI is doing it for me, I don't then go through that process of having to rearticulate the consultation in a note form and summarize it. And that lack of that the lack of that cognitive process means that my recollection of what happened is not as good when I next see that patient, which is definitely a downside. But as I mentioned before, with these technologies, it's all about weighing the upsides and the downsides. And for many clinicians, while they may experience that downside, it may well be worth it for the benefits that they're going to get. So with all of these things, you're weighing up the benefits and the disbenefits and some of the financial costs as well, but it's important to put all of those pieces together. Anyway, I just share those that brief presentation. I'm happy to take any questions. >> Thank you so much, Mike. That was incredibly helpful. Um, I was really struck by the fact that you talked about teams being really aware of the risks and mitigations and everyone having that shared ownership of that. So they're aware of of the risks, but also that the current standard of care might be worth or you know as you know as good as um the innovation that's being brought in and actually we quite often forget about that don't we that you know the current standard of practice might not be great and you're not always comparing kind of like for like um thank you for the personal reflections. There was one other thing I think you were going to talk about which was um TPP's acceptability or not and I just wondered if you want to say a couple of words on that before we move on to the next presenter there. >> Yes. Yes. So TPP issued some guidance um I think it was either early this year or start of last end of last year um which stated that they don't they they consider any use of robotic process automation software on top of their technology to be a breach of their contract with the practice or the user of that software. Um, so the question is whether this falls into that category or not. And now I'm not a legal expert and TPP would ultimately form their own opinions as to whether it is or not, but for some of the technologies they're using the IM1, the official integration with the system one system and that isn't using robotic process automation at all. So that's not likely to be affected by that. that is a that is a recognized integration into the system and there are agreements between the ambient tool provider and TPP to to support that use. So that wouldn't likely be affected by that. Other tools use a copy and paste method into the system which again is not robotic process automation. So I so that is not likely again in my opinion to to to affect things. where it would affect things is if it's essentially scraping data out of TPP or automatically putting it in via some robotic tool, some sort of software to automatically put it in. That's not an official integration. So just you need to just check with the vendor to see whether that's that's their method and whether that might put you in contractual beach with TPP. >> Fantastic. Thank you. Really pragmatic um advice. So questions that can be asked of the suppliers later today. We will have time for questions, but I'm going to ask um Dr. Andrew Noble um to speak first and then we'll we'll have questions for for both of you if that's okay. But huge thank you. So um next presentation is from Dr. Andrew Noble. Oh fantastic. I can see these slides coming up so I'll hand to you now. Um thank you. >> Hi thanks very much for asking me to come and talk as well Laura. So um I was asked to to come and talk about our experience of introducing an AI scribe um and and basically talk about some of the issues that also may have arisen in doing it. So whilst I'm going to talk about some of those I would actually say right at the beginning I did speak to some of my colleagues the other day and suggested what would happen if we took this away now um which was met with um constonnation and upset. Uh and I think it is certainly something that has been very gamechanging for us. It certainly changed the way we do things um the way we take notes, the way our notes are presented. Um and actually isn't something that we feel um we could do without now. So it's just worth saying that at the beginning. However, we have met various hurdles and things along the way and it'd be I think useful for everyone to hear what those sorts of things might have been. So this is about our journey. So I'll give you a bit of introduction and context at the beginning. Um we'll go through sort of what the actual challenge was which is clearly the documentation burden. Um then what the the sort of hurdles um were in sort of getting to the beginning. Um then we'll talk about our pilots um particularly how that informed our training. Um and then uh how we've sort of continued working with the the technology particularly around how we develop our templates. It's really I think be helpful to hear about some of the impacts that's had on patients and staff um and then a few thoughts about evaluating this um for the future and and the sort of continued evaluation as we go on. So a bit of an introduction. Um so I'm Andrew Noble. I'm a a GP with an extended role in frailty. In fact, all my work really nowadays is around frailty. um and within our frailty team at the Gene Bishop Center. I'm the lead on education and training and I've somehow adopted this uh lead around digital health which I think goes to the geekiest person in the team. So I don't have any qualifications I think that lead me to have that. I'm just very interested in it and have led on various other areas digital health. So the the AI scribing sort of fell to me. Um I work in the the in CHCP so the city healthcare partnership. Um and as I say our the context of this introducing this AI scribe was around um frailty. So we're talking about patients sort of older patients who are very frail um in lots of different health care settings as well. So not just in the Gene Bishop Center patients in their own home and patient patients in our community bed unit and also a lot of work over sort of urgent community response over the phone. Um so this is just our journey um going through all of that and how we introduce this So the initial challenge um and this is the challenge that AI scribes are are trying to improve for us all was the documentation burden. Um and in effect uh I suppose when you look at our work streams in some areas we are spending 30 to 40 minutes writing up notes. So if I'm seeing a patient doing a comprehensive judic assessment, I might see that patient for an hour or so, but I'll spend another 30 or 40 minutes writing the notes afterwards, putting the care plans together, doing the referrals that related to that consultation. Um so we we had a little look at what what we were doing in the work streams and looked at the ones with the heavier documentation and as I say we came up with three areas although we do use it across all of our areas but um the comprehensive judge assessments was one urgent community response is another so there's quite a a heavy workload in that area so you're it's a bit like general practice you're seeing um patients sort of one after the other over the phone offering advice to other health care professionals Um, and they can last, uh, those consultations anything from 10 minutes to to half an hour. Um, often with lots of things to do afterwards. Um, and the documentation for that could take anything from 5 to 30 minutes afterwards as well. Um, and then we looked at our hospital at home, which is our virtual ward. Um, how we might use the the scribes in that sense as well. So yeah, so what were the hurdles in uh in doing this? Well, the initial thing we looked at this back in March last year. So, this was just when people were starting to think about AI scribes and in particular when when none of the AI scribes I think had really gone through the NHS sort of processes um in looking at their the data protection all that side of things. So, in fact the first thing we did was to contact our own IM and um and uh information governance teams um to sort of say well how do we go about this? how we're going to start using an AI scribe and the first thing we had was that we had a lack of an AI policy within the um within CHCP. Um so that had to be addressed in the first instance before we could go any further. Um and also all the GDPR compliance, all the stuff that's been talked about prior to to me talking to you. Um all that stuff that the companies were still going through. So that process was going to take a little bit of time. So there was a a time between April and end of July where all of that stuff was being put in place. So we had a little bit of a gap there to wait before we could do anything. So we had our AI policy established. Uh we had a a clinical safety officer um who we um uh we actually buy in at CHCMCP from another company. Um but they were very useful in in setting this process going. I think it might be one of the first times they've gone through a kind of AI technology and and um the sorts of things we should be thinking about. But certainly as clinicians open their eyes to a few things that we hadn't been thinking about before. Um we had to get through say our governance committees and thinking about how we safely implement a scribing and particularly as this hadn't been done at this point anywhere else or at least was only just being started everyone approached us very very tentatively. Um, and I think a lot of the risks that came onto our um, our risk register, it would be nice to see that. Actually, Mike, I was really interested in your um, in how you sort of put together your hazard log because ours is just a massive spreadsheet um, which is really difficult to navigate. Uh but there were lots of things in there even thinking about what happened if the the Wi-Fi went down and uh what would happen if uh you know in various instances where hallucinations were you know were taking place within technology and we hadn't really I suppose um used it properly yet to really understand all of that. Um so so we then embarked upon what we called our pre-pilot which was just a set of a chosen set of clinicians to work through for a month starting to use the technology um to try and understand what some of these training needs uh and hazards and things were going to be. So so we very sort of tentatively and carefully sort of introduced that. The other thing we needed to think about um was around sort of patient consent uh and how we actually went through that in our systems as well because um one making sure the patients are consented but two also being able to trace back um where we've actually used the AI tool in the system because the auditing processes we had to put in place in order to to look at the notes and and and be able to go back take a sample of notes and look to see if there were any um issues that arisen there. So we did our sort of pre-pilot um and as I say this was just a small group of us um who basically tentatively introduced the technology into some of the work streams. It allowed us to start thinking about the sorts of things we needed to talk to staff about in the training which I'll come to in a minute. Um and therefore allowed us to identify the the training needs for the whole team. Um the only thing I want to point out this side is we decided we'd do this as a phased roll out rather than just giving it to everyone. I have seen some organizations just giving it to everyone and and sort of see how everybody uses it. But because we're multi-disiplinary team, we needed to understand how each of the disciplines within that MVT would be using it as well. So we did a sort of very much a phase roll out over a period of about four months bringing different uh parts of the team into that at uh at any one point. Um and then we made sure that everyone who was using it before they got a login uh they had to have attended the training which we we initially recorded um so that everyone could do that and then then they get their login. And then I have to say it's the most popular training session I have ever done in our organization was when we introduced AI scribes. So the first thing we brought up and the thing I wanted to underline a bit was actually starting off with what the limitations of the AI scribe were because there was a a feeling amongst the team that ah this is going to be brilliant. Everything will just be done for me. It's instant bang goes into the notes. And I think actually breaking that um understanding in the first instance was really important because clearly you get hallucinations, clearly most of the um uh the notes that were produced need a little bit of tweaking and editing from us. Um, and unless you actually prepare your team to do that, the first time that happens to them where they look and say, "Oh, that's not quite right or it's got that wrong or the context of this isn't quite right." They abandon it um because they just they don't understand what their role is now that we've introduced the AI scribe. And actually that role shifts from being somebody who is writing lots of notes and putting things together at the end to someone who is checking a set of notes, making sure that the context is correct and and then putting those notes into the into the patient's electronic record. And actually Mike was talking about um how he was concerned about his sort of iterative processes uh of you know what he'd normally do is he'd write a set of notes and he'd help that would help him to form his sort of management plan as he went. And I have to say that that was my concern initially as well um in doing this because I used that process um cognitively to help me sort of pull things together. But actually I found I very quickly adapted to being the checker and actually that process happened in that time. So, as I was checking the notes and going through, I was formulating various thoughts and plans around that and maybe therefore making tweaks at the end. Um, and I I can definitely say that our the describe that we're using over time has actually got much better. And I don't think that I know that's not because they're actually looking at our our consultations and how we do things because they don't do that. They don't take that data to do it, but it's actually because their training in the background is getting better and for the scribes. So certainly the technology is sort of continuing to prove um all the time. Um we talked to staff about consultation management because some of the issues here were um things about um multiple people in the room. So you imagine if you've got a couple of patients in for comprehensive gic assessment um you've got a patient sorry and a couple of relatives um they do like to join in which is great and the sky is pretty good at sort of deciphering all of that. But sometimes you'll have a relative talking about what their medication list is or what things they've had going on and that can sometimes get picked up into the patient's um uh sort of list as well. So you just have to be aware of that and sometimes manage the consultation a little bit in that sense. Um busy rooms. So our UCR room is quite a busy room. There's five or six people um in there often on the phone, some of us with quite loud voices. Um and occasionally you will find that there's some crossover as well. So, we're actually looking at our room setup and how we can sort of dampen down the echoes and the sounds a little bit to try and improve the um the note takingaking there. But certainly making people aware that these things do happen and you should be sort of looking into the note for that sort of thing. Um the the templates uh we talked a lot about how we use templates in our different workflows and work streams and actually with the staff we although we we weren't particularly training the staff themselves to make the templates a small cohort of our staff did need training and creating those because what we've tried to do as an organization is is have a standard set of templates for the organization and they have to reflect the templates that are in system one um which makes it a tiny bit complicated um and in fact we have had to manage our templates in system one a little bit because the AI scribe actually now starts to construct the um the the structure um of our consultations for us. So we can actually paste into less boxes um but at the same time we have to keep recoding all the things that have been going on um normally through the way we take our uh record our electronic patient records. So it's a bit of a we've had to sort of weigh that up a bit and try and make that work. hopefully integration um when that comes will help to solve some of those issues. Um and again there were some technical things we needed to talk about. Um initially we were using it through the web but the AI tool then developed a desktop app and phone app and actually is just keeping staff ab breast of how those things work. So all of those things went into the training. Um and uh as I say uh people then went away to start start using the tool. Um, so I talked a little bit about working with templates. Actually, I might just skip through this section a little bit. Um, it's really I suppose some of this is just when you start to understand the structure and the way that the templates you can create templates in in the the AI tool. It does actually feed a little bit into how you then operate your templates in your electronic patient record. Um, and I have to say, um, so anyone knows anything about large language models, the template that we're talking about here in the AI tool is literally a prompt to large language model that's working off the transcript that's been created. Um, to therefore create whatever you want out of the AI tool. And for us, for instance, I can create three or four pieces of documentation out of one transcript, which is what I'd normally be doing at the end of a consultation, but typing them all separately. So, it saves an enormous amount of time when doing that. Um, we had to think about a few uh other issues here. So, we did a full audit of our notes before and then we've audited our notes afterwards and we're about to go into what's a third audit now of our notes to check that the um that that what's being recorded, what people are actually pasting in um from the AI tool is actually uh still meeting our our sort of um standards for notes. I mean essentially as people probably expect the AI tool has has increased the stand. We have a read pretty good standard of notes to be fair but it has increased it's improved it. It's half the amount of spelling mistakes in there. The only spelling mistakes in there now are the edits that we make in the uh uh in the actual AI note. Um and it's reduced the amount of abbreviations that we're using. Um and it's structured better. There's things that are included in there because of the templates we apply which people weren't always recording like who was present in the consultation, what the full follow-up plans and things might be. So the notes much easier uh to to read which I think is obviously sort of safer in the long run. We're incredibly we the policy and the AI policy we have is there's always a human in the loop and I think that's with all AI scribes anyway and with the NHS um uh England guidance as well needs to be a human in the loop and in particular a lot of that I think for me anyway is about sort of that cognitive thing about checking the notes and making sure that I've got the you the same management plan in my notes as has come through on the tool itself. Um I'm aware that we are a bit press of time. So I'm just going to to move through to bit of the impact on staff and patients. Um we have a really nice um patient group at CHCP. They're always very keen uh to speak their mind, tell us exactly what they think, which is good because you need to hear those things. And we took this to them before we actually went um uh went to the live with this asking what they thought might come up, what sort of concerns they might have. Um, no one was particularly concerned about the AI component to be fair, but they were worried about things like um, accessibility for patients and until we explained fully how the technology work, they were worried about um, you know, patients with disabilities um, or or of um, different languages etc. might not be able to access the tool. Um, but the biggest concern that they they had which I had not even thought of and was actually the name of the tool. Um, so we use Heidi. Um, and they probably won't thank me for saying this, but our patient group was was concerned that men would feel excluded because they had Heidi listening in the background to them and that they might feel that they couldn't sort of um talk about the things. Well, to be honest, I don't use the uh I don't use the the name Heidi. Uh I just say I've got an AI scribe. Um so that hopefully that hasn't that hasn't arisen for anybody. Um but I think it did obviously it changed the way I presented it to patients. um rather than saying I'm using an AI tool called hiding. Um I have fed that back to Heidi but I don't know whether it's a huge problem but certainly that it it influenced the way we presented it to patients. Um so I think again one of the other things I've just put at the bottom here is reviewing outputs which I've actually just started doing because I heard someone else was was doing this and actually talking through the output with the patient at the end. Actually, before I would just summarize what I thought was going to happen, and as they left, I'd put the scribe on and and see that the scribes captured it all. But now, I actually get the patient to sit in the room with me when we're doing a face to face consultation, say, "Well, let's see what the the scribes thought of all of this." And I go through the plan with them from the scribe. Um, and I found that really helpful. And I think patients have found that really useful as well. It takes a while for our longer consultations for that to happen, but certainly in smaller consultations, I think that's a real benefit of these. And I think particularly when Mike's mentioned that patients checking their own notes now if they've agreed an output with you before they've left then then you know when they go back to look at their own notes then maybe that may be much better for things like medical defense purposes and stuff in in the future. Um although it might take up some of the time saving in actually creating a note with the AI. Um impact on staff. Uh someone mentioned before I think in the chat about saving you know staff uh saving time writing stuff over lunchtime or writing their notes at home. The biggest thing that came from our staff was actually oh I've gone home on time. Um it wasn't so much about increase in productivity seeing more patients actually I managed to get home on time and that was really important. But we think the time savings in note takingaking are about 30 to 40%. Certainly from our initial pilot that that was the case and we're actually now following this up with a a much bigger study. um uh which has been led by University of York actually in the health economics team I can't remember their full title um but uh that's going to to look much much deeper into the sort of costbenefit side of all of this and how much time we are actually saving but certainly for us as a team the one thing we've done from this is for years we've been trying to introduce protected learning time um for our team and actually it's been really hard to get the leverage to do that because we can't reduce number of patients that we So what we've actually done is on we've now introduced um afternoons where we have protected learning time for the whole frailty team and because of using the um the AI scribe we can see and make up the deficit in as it were in patient numbers on other days the team are quite happy to do that because they know they've got that increased um sort of productivity in the background. So um so we've actually been able to set up a whole learning sort of education sort of experience for our team um which is actually two protected afternoons a month um which is is already that started a couple of months ago and that's already having a benefit to the whole team. So um evaluation the impact of future directions. Well I've just mentioned that we've got another study in fact I had a meeting about that before I came here um which is starting in July. Um and that's actually just going that's going to be looking at not only the qualitative stuff but also trying to dive into the um sort of cost benefit sort of implications even looking at what areas you know which staffing areas benefit more from it. Although my experience is that they all say they do, but just looking to see what the the savings are um from that side and actually uh look at what the time savings are, drill that down as much as we can. It's sometimes really hard to pin that down. It feels like you save time. I definitely save time, but actually getting a figure to that and trying to to sort of put that out there as well. So, we'll be able to make that available um once that's uh once that's been done and finished, which will be around about October time. Um, and then I just uh Laura just asked me to put a few things on here about what would we do, what are the key takeaways from this in the future. Make sure don't don't just offer it to staff. I think staff training is so important with this and I'm sure everyone else on this call would sort of agree with that. But put some of those things in that we've been talking about already about what the AI tool, you know, that it will do things like hallucinate and it will sometimes make inferences. Um, and no matter what the manufacturers tell you, it does happen with all the tools. Um, it clearly is improving. Uh, but it's really important to put that in there and and outline the staff's role in putting that, you know, in checking that, putting the notes because it's their responsibility when it goes into the notes for that consultation for for that particular consultation. Uh, get it and governance IG in there early uh because they take so long uh because everyone has lots of meetings and things. Um, but I really feel like we could we could streamline our processes much better. Um, I think to get these things moving because one of my my concerns is that we're going to start get driven by the AI technology rather than drive the AI technology itself. And I think as an NHS as a whole, we need to get much better at evaluating evaluating safely, but actually I think we can evaluate things faster if we streamline our processes a bit better. Um, so thinking about that really for the future. Um, and yeah, just note that this stuff is evolving and the stuff that's around the corner sounds amazing, but we're going to need to know how to evaluate that. But I'm I'm really keen to see how things like AI summarization, that kind of stuff, um, starts to develop because I think that'll have huge benefits to us um, if introduced safely. I think Laura, that is my presentation. I'm sorry if we've gone over a tiny bit. >> No, it's fantastic. Thank you. we could have listened all morning. Um it was absolutely brilliant to hear kind of how it's gone in practice. You obviously are a real forerunner in terms of the adoption. I really um thought it was fascinating what you were saying around a ensuring that all staff had undertaken training before they started using it but also the kind of clarity on the limitations of the AI and ensuring that there was that human in the loop throughout. Um and just wonderful to hear about um taking the patient through the write up um that have been produced by the ombbit scribe. Um, absolutely fantastic. Thank you for sharing. We are running over, but I know there will be questions. Um, so let let's just for a few more minutes in case people have questions either for Andy or for Mike. Um, yeah, this is a great opportunity to pick brains about people who are kind of living and doing it already. Um while people are thinking about that question there's some great comments um in the chat particularly around the kind of the regulatory piece um the fast nature evolving uh nature um of this technology um and how to approach kind of some of the practical pieces around the kind of the hazard and the risk logs but any questions >> I was going to say look just an interesting um uh ju just it was worth just explaining how my day operates around AI just very very quickly but so I home visits on Tuesday for some of our our very housebound patients with frailty and which again hourlong consultations in the home and I actually started off the day by creating a note for them all on the on on the the AI tool which was me dictating in all the information and stuff that I knew from their medical notes putting together a kind of my thoughts about things before I went there so that I already had a note sort of created a lot of context on it when I got to the patient's home I popped my phone down onto the desk got their consent to to use the AI tool and we had a conversation the chat and that just sat in the background doing things and then at the end of all of that we summarized our plan talked about what was going on and I' I'd go back sat in my car where I can't normally get um reception for for my computer for log on for system one but I was able to then just quickly edit the the output that the the air tool had given me on the phone so when I went back later into the um the Gene Bishop center later in the afternoon I literally pasted did the notes in, it was all there and done for me. And that process was so much slicker than the uh the sort of scribbling everything down bits of paper, um trying to remember stuff that you'd done before, scribbling all that down on bits of paper, getting back to the G Bishop Center, writing all the care plans, etc., etc. I think that probably saved me for those three patients I saw that morning, probably saved me an hour and a half for the rest of the day. >> Excellent. Thank you. And one question from Jason in the chat around did you do a time motion study to um identify the time savings for staff? >> We certainly did a study looking at the so we did a pilot looking at the time savings as in we got staff to estimate before so before they all got their hide your login they also had to fill in a survey for us. So we got them all to do um you know estimate what their times you know how long it took them in each particular work stream to write the notes and then we redid that survey going sort of back about three um it's about three months into it. We redid that survey again um and it was about a 30 to 40% sort of reduction in time there but we had set it up as kind of brackets of time which I'm a bit disappointed I did that because I'd like people to actually specify the number um and actually sort of done it that way. So the study we're going to do will be looking at that really hard I think sometimes to other than having I think the some of the studies are going great street they they actually have someone sat in the room with a stopwatch doing this which I think obviously is going to be much more precise but but obviously we we can't do that sort of thing. Um but what we are going to do in the next study is record that there are certain clicks that occur on the system um when you're doing certain things. So when a when a a note's been created and then also when you put something into the notes or you click copy, you could put something into the notes. We're going to start recording those times because they approximate very much to the time it's taken to to create the note and use them in this study. >> Fantastic. Thank you, Mike. Just just touching on that a little. I think what there's a temptation to look at the time saving as as the key output of this technology and I think that's an overly reductive thinking of it. Um it does save time. Um obviously I don't have the objective evidence though there is plenty of it establishing I think it does save time is my my gut feel. Um but that's not the main advantages. There's there is I I mentioned a little about the the the cognitive disbenefit I've experienced, but there is a cognitive benefit as well in that it frees your brain up from having to try and remember every trip, every fine detail of the consultation as you go, ready to write it all up afterwards. you can actually focus on the patient and the conversation and that is liberating and relaxing and puts you at ease which I suspect puts the patient at ease as well and take some of the pressure off the off everybody and there's other other benefits in terms of the note quality which we've alluded to. Um there are various other benefits downstream from this that are beyond the time saving. On the subject of the time saving as well, you then got to consider whether that there's a natural tendency to think, oh well, we've saved five minutes per consultation. That means we can see X additional patients per day. The patients that I've the practices that I've spoken to that are doing this and the organizations that are using it, they're generally not seeing additional patients. What they're doing is reducing staff burnout. But that itself has a benefit downstream because that's less likely to lead to less sick time, less turnover of staff which reduces training impacts. So I think one of the really hard parts about this is considering the the cost benefits. Now at the moment the technologies are mostly being offered free to practices and to users, but that won't be the case forever. So I think it's going to be important when we're doing that consideration of cost benefit the cost analysis to think of those other costs beyond just uh it's going to allow more time more patients to be seen. >> Excellent. Thank you so much. I'm going to draw us to a close with this section to give people a break, but I just want to say a huge huge thank you um for sharing um those presentations which are absolutely fascinating um and I'm sure there'll be lots of questions and thoughts percolating as a result. So, a a a huge huge thank you for um from us. We're going going to now take um a 10-minute break. Um give your eyes a rest, take a comfort break, grab a cup of coffee, and we will meet back here at 11:45. Um so, thank you so much.