Title: Eric Topol on Why Doctors Shouldn’t Fear AI — And How It Could Finally Fix Our Broken System
Channel: Offcall
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZDdgZGcYqa4
Transcript source: supadata:supadata

Back when I wrote Deep Medicine, I thought our biggest thing in AI was going to be to relieve the data clerk burden of doctors, give patients more autonomy, get us the gift of time, and bring humanity back to medicine. I think that's starting to happen, but I think what's even bigger to me, much bigger, is that we have this new found capacity to prevent these major age-related diseases. So, instead of all this work that's being done to reverse aging, let's accept aging, but don't accept that these diseases are obligatory part of aging, cuz they don't have to be. Welcome to How I Doctor, where we're bringing joy back to medicine. Today, I'm joined by Dr. Eric Topol, cardiologist, founder of Scripps Research Translational Institute, and one of the most cited medical researchers in the world. He's the author of some of my favorite books, including 2019's Deep Medicine, talking about AI, and the brand new bestseller, Superagers. I think a lot of Dr. Topol's research has directly impacted my own specialty of emergency medicine. TPA for STEMIs, the TIMI trials, EMS acquisition of EKGs, handheld ultrasound, but most of our listeners probably already know Dr. Topol because we skew toward a tech-enabled future of medicine, How Should I Be Using AI Clinicians? Here's the real reason I wanted Eric on the podcast since we launched a year ago. More than anyone else I've interviewed, Mark Cuban, Shirao, Dr. Glockenflecken, I want to follow in Eric Topol's footsteps. He is the voice and the pulse of high-quality evidence in medicine, and I think the future of our profession. He has stayed true to his mission throughout his career, and I've tried to do the same with my career, with MDCalc, with the NNT, and now with Off Call, supporting big ideas and important conversations about where medicine is going. I don't just want to know what AI can do, I want to think about how it should do things. So, today, I want to know what Dr. Topol thinks of all of this. Even if he may not have all the answers, he might help us figure out how to think about them clearly. Dr. Eric Topol, welcome to How I Doctor. Before we jump into today's episode, I want to give a huge shoutout to our first-ever How I Doctor podcast sponsor, Abridge. Abridge is the leading AI platform [music] that drafts structured, clinically useful notes at the point of conversation. Clinicians remain in full control because they review and finalize every note. With Abridge, many clinicians report reclaiming time and reducing their documentation burden, myself included. I've been using Abridge in my role as a practicing emergency physician in San Francisco, and clinicians who use it report up to an 86% reduction in effort writing notes, a 78% reduction in cognitive load, and 70% decrease in [music] after-hours documentation. The company was also founded by a physician and is completely dedicated to empowering clinicians, which is what makes them the perfect first sponsor for How I Doctor. If you aren't yet using Abridge, inquire with your IT department today, or reach out at abridge.com/contact. Thank you, and now let's get to today's episode. Before we jump into the episode, I want to thank our sponsor, Evidently. Evidently is the clinical data intelligence platform built to help physicians harness the ocean of patient data they're drowning in every day. >> [music] >> From chart summarization to AI-assisted note drafting and denial appeal support, Evidently makes sure the right data shows up at the right time. Physicians using Evidently report spending less time hunting through charts [music] and more time focusing on patient care. That's why they've become a trusted partner to health systems looking to improve documentation quality and revenue sustainability. The company is led by providers and AI researchers that are dedicated to reducing documentation burden and helping clinicians practice at the [music] top of their license. If you want to see what Evidently can do for your hospital or your practice, [music] reach out today at www.evidently.com. Now, let's get into today's episode. Well, Graham, thank you. That's an awfully kind introduction. You write a lot about science, but I kind of want to ask you how you feel about this moment that we're in in late 2025. You know, we have incredible medicines and technologies and AI, but the trust in, I think, our medical system feels worse than it's felt certainly since I was started med school in 2003. How do you think about the optimism from the science side with the public skepticism? Yeah, you're bringing up such a critical issue. So, when I got my first job with University of Michigan in cardiology, that was '85, so 40 years ago. And during these 40 years, I I I, you know we've we were doing pretty well and then now we've hit bottom. Uh and what you're bringing out here is that there's this dichotomy of the most impressive technology opportunities, uh the tools that we have to take medicine to hot toes and higher levels than we ever would have envisioned. And at the same time, we have anti-science and I you know, everything. Um so, we have made much more difficult to make the advances that we should be uh easily um jumping ahead. And it's it's unsettling, it's vexing. I'm just hoping Graham that it's just a short-term uh story and that that the work that we're all doing to advance the field will be something that's unstoppable. Just needs a uh continued push and uh we'll get back on track eventually. Eric, do you see it as physicians or the system kind of needing to communicate better or is it really the proof is in the pudding that we really are going to see some of these transformational breakthroughs, people are going to see it for themselves and they're going to have to believe it? Yeah, I think it's both. You know, we're going to see more and more compelling evidence that um there's a new way to practice medicine and new way to achieve accuracy and humanistic care and all sorts of things that AI and other things that we have in the offing now can can make a difference. But on the other hand, um as physicians and scientists, we don't um do anything to neutralize the toxicity, conspiracy theories. I mean, a very small percent of us, perhaps 1%, are active on social media platforms trying to get the the right word out. I have to imagine that you are constantly sent papers and pitches and slide decks about the the latest breakthroughs. You know, and some of it it certainly is real and some of it is probably snake oil. How do you decide like what is hype and what is, "Hey, I should actually be paying attention to this." Your newsletter is always coming out with like, "Hey, there's a new technology that may help us in a year or five or 10 years or something like that." How do you How do you personally decide what is worth you digging into and and evaluating? Well, because I'm old and have this 40-year span of evaluating things and I've always been trying to think ahead and trying to get some kind of vision for how medicine will uh evolve um as we go forward. So, um like for example, when I saw back in 2023 the first paper on these protein organ clocks which we've never had ability to to judge the pace of aging of our organs in the body and our immune system. And that really got me excited because it was a whole new look. Or when I saw data on a PII 217, a inflammation marker in the blood that tells us many, many years in advance about whether a person's really at risk for Alzheimer's. And that we can modify it like an LDL cholesterol with interventions. Uh these are things that just grab me. You know, they just say, "Oh, wow." But I uh read a lot every every day and week and I you know, I kind of have a feeling for what at least at least to me seems like something that represents a you know, something that it could be impactful. Physicians, we are so acculturated into the way that we are trained to do things and we never want to we never want to be you know, we never want to be the first person to use a medicine and we never want to be the last either. Like how do you decide like, "Yeah, maybe we are thinking about this wrong. Maybe Maybe more heart attacks are due to inflammation and aren't necessarily just like cholesterol plaque um that has built up and ruptured and and thrombosed." Like what makes you be able to challenge your own kind of traditional medical thinking? Yeah, I mean, that's one of the things that I try to teach and uh emphasize to all of our young, you know, trainees and students and even faculty and that just keep challenging what is dogma. Our sacred cows in medicine are uh plentiful uh and often can be shot down. So, a a perfect one is the example you just uh provided. So, for all these years as a cardiologist all we did was um focus on narrowings and the so-called that a name I made, the oculostenotic reflex where you see a narrowing and then you put a stent >> Got to open it, yeah. do a bypass, you know. And so, turns out that's just a very small part of the story that we have been fixated upon. We still have a lot of heart attacks. And most of them are not from critical narrowings, but rather that they have inflamed arteries, and that we're not paying attention to that. They're not obstructive. And we can now pick them up. Certainly, we have been people who are suspicious because they're high risk. We can do a a coronary CT angiogram. And and do AI of the epicardial fat around the vessel and say, "Oh, wow, this one's inflamed even though there's no significant narrowing. Oh, wow, this patient has three arteries inflamed. So, we really got to get all over this." So, this is a whole new path in cardiology that we've ignored for decades. The high-risk patient and the vulnerable atherosclerotic non-obstructive plaque. But that type of questioning dogma is something that we should be doing like every day cuz you know, we we It's too many things we accept without adequate evidence. I am curious how much you think stuff that we've either, you know, whether it's like inflammatory component of STEMIs or stuff that we have always just called idiopathic is actually the immune system or it's or in it's inflammation and we just fundamentally we're calling it idiopathic cuz we we just don't know. That feels to me like it's a trend. Do you feel like that's going to get unearthed as well? I do think that we can do much better to define these. Back in 2000, as you recall, in the early 2000s, we thought that the DNA genome sequence was going to unlock everything. That was our operating instructions. The problem is you can study the 6 billion nucleotides in a genome and you won't find out about the immune system because except in rare mutations associated with very rare diseases of the immune system. You have to do perturbations. You have to do special immune system assessments. So, we don't have that clinically. You know, so like you're in the ER and you're thinking, "Well, this patient's immune system, maybe that's an explanation for what's going on here." There is no test that you can do. It's a joke. Here it is. We're basically in 2026 now. And we The only thing we have is a white cell neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio, which is a joke. So, why don't we have uh you know, ability to look at T and B cell function, you know, NK dendritic cells, antibodies, autoantibodies, T and B cell repertoire sequencing, interference. They should be available. And they're not. So, this is a real problem is the immune system's damn important, but we can't assess it in patients except in rare academic labs that they can do a comprehensive job. That's a big gaping hole in medicine today. We we It was interesting in the book that, you know, you got access to all the coolest researchers that like were you know, running like an immune panel on you to say, "Oh, yeah, Eric Topol has had rhinovirus 15 times and you've had like Coxsackie 2, you know, three times or whatever." Like it was interesting that those markers are like stuck in your body permanently, that those can be detected. Clearly opened the door to this idea that like these viruses are making their impact on us and leaving their footprints permanently. Absolutely. You know, when I found out I never had had cytomegalovirus, CMV, that was really a stunner because most people have. And that could be good or bad. I mean, we're we're seeing all sorts of things related to Epstein-Barr virus and now other viruses. And as you say, the link to pathogens is is becoming more important than we ever had. That's another one of these dogmas that have to be, "Oh, Alzheimer's, that can't have anything to do with an infection, you know." Well, yeah, guess what? I mean, look what happened when they challenged that peptic ulcer disease was due to H. pylori. You know, duh. We should be open-minded about these things. >> [music] >> Hey, today's episode is brought to you by Abridge. We all feel the weight of clinical documentation that follows us home and chips away at our personal time. With Abridge, clinicians can change that. Abridge drafts a structured, clinically useful note at the point of conversation, all seamlessly integrated into Epic and customizable to your specialty while you review and finalize every word. Clinicians have reported significantly less after-hours charting, improved satisfaction, and dramatically lower burnout. Let technology support your day instead of interrupting it. Visit abridge.com to learn how you can focus more on patient care and less on paperwork. Let's put the care back in clinical care. A quick word about today's sponsor, Evidently. Their platform turns an ocean of fragmented clinical data into concise, actionable insights. Chart summaries, note drafting, denial appeal support, HCC capture, so you spend time caring, not chasing. >> [music] >> A transplant surgeon at a large academic medical center recently took transplant referral review from 2 hours to 20 minutes [music] with AI-assisted chart review from Evidently. Physicians deserve workflows that improve accuracy, reduce exhausting chart biopsy, and help us practice at the top of our license. [music] If you want to see how this might work in your hospital or your department, go to evidently.com. That's e v i d e n t l y dot com to get started today. >> [music] >> It it feels like during COVID we lost the uh we lost the the battle on like not doing viral swabs on people. I feel like society now expects you're going to get a flu and a COVID and RSV swab, like the the triple swab, when you go to the urgent care or something like that. And you know, part of me does wonder um if there maybe would be value in doing the, you know, 15 like extended comprehensive viral panel on people. Would we learn things from that or understand patterns with these people that we don't because we just assume, "Yeah, you've got some virus. I don't know what it is." And and it doesn't matter. Maybe it does, I don't know. Well, no, I think it does matter. Um one of the problems is we haven't had a very low-cost practical way, you know, to to get a a comprehensive sweep of these viruses and pathogens to send it out. It takes weeks. It's very expensive. But we're moving to a point where it's going to be very inexpensive and practical. What you're bringing up is kind of a futuristic way that will bring in the mix of understanding pathogens. And one of the most exciting things in all of medicine today is achieving what we call uh well, immune tolerance or uh tolerogenic approaches. Where like, for example, all these studies now shown that if you have lupus, if you have dermatomyositis, if you have even multiple sclerosis, you can take the uh see the B cells with uh T cell CD19 wipeout. And when the B cells come back, they don't attack the person's again. I mean, that that it's basically in the chapter about controlling our immune system and super aging. That is shocking. You can reboot the immune system. Wow. And there's lots of other ways you can get tolerance with vaccines and whatnot. So, our ability to measure the immune system is way behind our ability to control it. And then you have all these cooks out there that are taking rapamycin, you know, at variable doses. They're trying to already take rapamycin, you'll live longer, you'll live healthier. Well, guess what? You know, that you could be under severe immunosuppression at low doses. We have no way to measure it. And some of the biggest proponents of rapamycin, like Peter Attia and Brian Johnson, they stopped taking cuz they were getting all these infections. >> Yeah. Well, they were after they told millions of people they should all take rapamycin. I mean, so that shows you how bad our handle is on the immune system. >> You know, I wrote a review of of Dr. Attia's book. You know, Eric, it really felt like your book was like I wrote this down like like an evidence-based Outlive. Like I think I fully agree with Peter Attia's point on healthspan instead of lifespan as as being an important thing and prevention and, you know, keeping blood pressure and A1C down for a long time and, you know, like those in order to have a long healthspan, you have to do those things. But I really appreciate that you had just citation after citation and study after study explaining what's fact and what's fiction and >> Yeah, I mean, Peter's had I also you know, interviewed him and wrote a review of his book. There are many good things in it. But there were many things in there which have gone completely off the rails. The rapamycin's one example, this overdose of protein that has no support, even though he's selling these David bars and all this stuff. And not even a mention of the potential benefits of GLP-1 drugs or the role of multimodal AI or, you know, various things that we know are actually uh important or or are emerging important. But yeah, there's so many things that were I consider reckless in there. Total body MRI for everyone? Uh show me the data for that, you know. Well, Eric, you brought up GLP-1s. The the data is continues to come out about, you know, X new condition there seems to be some benefit from to GLP-1s. I mean, like should we all be on GLP-1s? Yeah. I did approach that in the book of course and it's possible that's where we're headed even for people who are not overweight, but we've seen as you well know the benefits various organs not just weight loss like the heart and the kidney and the liver and we're seeing it for addiction and migraine and we're testing it in long COVID right now in a large trial. We just finished enrollment of a thousand participants in less than a month. Um versus placebo. So I think you're on to something important. What I would emphasize is whatever we're seeing today with the two popular gut hormone mimetics basically we have an other eight or nine in the pipeline. And we have combinations of all these. Just think, you know, how many more and oral preparations. So we're just at the beginning of this GLP-1 gut hormone revolution in medicine. So as it goes forward, it's very possible that we'll land on something that would be helping everyone. But we'll see. I mean it's still it's much too early to know. In your book you got a bunch of really good neologisms. You've got the welderly, you know, you did a study of 1400 people with oh I think over 85 with no chronic disease, right? And no medications, right? >> And and take no meds. I mean I I you know, I'll see these people occasionally in the ER and it's like oh you you haven't been seen in 10 years and you still are healthy and but it is a little weird to see these people you open their problem list and it's kind of empty. That was the best part the chart review. Like no chart. It it took seven years to find these people. Have they just kind of dodged every single bullet? Like they just have everything lined up where they had a good genetic predisposition, they had good probably habits around exercise and alcohol and is that your theory of these people that like they kind of lucked out? Well, it's great that you asked that and you know, what how do people get to 85 without these three age-related diseases cuz that should be our goal. We we should be able to get there. And of course by if they get to that point they have a lot of good years ahead of them as well. So the point here is that the genomes whole genome sequence of these 1400 people, they didn't show much at all. I know. That didn't make any sense to me. I thought for sure there would be something there. >> were when we did this, this was almost a decade investment of work. We were sure we would find the secrets of, you know, so there's a small genomics contribution much much smaller than we had estimated. Then there's this luck point that you're bringing up. Sure, there's some random stochastic aspect. But I do think um the lifestyle which affects the immune system in a very big way. Physical activity is so important. The good diets, sleep, and being, you know having social connections, having a purpose. These were people with really good optimistic kind of attitudes and um they did all the things for the most part. Now did we have exceptions? Sure. We had a 99-year-old guy you all never forget who still was smoking two packs a day. That's, you know, but most of them fit the healthy lifestyle. Yeah. Uh but what I would say is the missing piece here appears to be this immune system story because while we were doing that work and only in recent years have we seen that when you measure the immune system that is the driver of healthy aging. So if you get there by lifestyle, great. If you get there by luck, great, but probably there's some things that we can do. Like for example giving shingles vaccine to people over 50. Who would have thought that that would lead to 20 to 25% reduction of dementia and Alzheimer's disease, right? And it's probably because it gets our immune system in a much better state to avoid that immunosenescence. And I think that's the ticket for us to get promote this healthy aging superager concept. >> Yeah. Eric, I'm going to I'm going to transition us to to a little bit about deep medicine and and AI by asking you are we all just pre-sick? There is there anybody that's actually healthy besides maybe these, you know, this very small cohort of welderly patients. How do you think of that? Well, we do have a very unhealthy population um and and perhaps we're going to see with the further reductions in cost and availability of the GLP-1 drugs for people who would benefit. We'll see um some improvements of that profile, but the obesity and the diabetes is just so rampant in our population. No, I think the problem we have, 25% of Americans only have physical activity that's beating the bare minimum, you know, the the absolute lowest level. That means we have basically uh uh a sedentary population. How do we get them moving? That's what I'm thinking, Graham, is that we can't do that by just saying the same thing to all people. We've got to be able to at the individual level say uh well, Graham, you are healthy right now, but our models show us that in in 14.2 years, you're going to have a heart attack. Okay? We I mean, we can do that now, which is wild. And um this is how we're going to take these steps in you so that you're never going to have a heart attack. And maybe we have some indicators that when that specificity is used, that will have a much better yield of people having durable uh changes in lifestyle because they don't just come that one off to you. You're going to see them again and say, "Oh wow, look at this progress we've made. We've redone the models, and you know what? If we don't see there's not you know, So, everything changes. The the the the big difference now is prediction with AI multimodal AI. It's not just if yes or no. It's when. Who would have thought we could do that? So, this is really an exciting change, and that's why, you know, back when I wrote Deep Medicine, I thought our biggest thing in AI was going to be to relieve the data clerk burden of doctors, give patients more autonomy, get us the gift of time, and bring humanity back to medicine. I I think that's starting to happen, but I think what's even bigger to me, much bigger, is that we have this new found capacity to prevent these major age-related diseases. So, instead of all this work that's being done to reverse aging, let's just accept aging, but don't accept that these diseases are obligatory part of aging cuz they don't have to be. I love that. That's a great reframing of of aging as like, you know, "Oh, I guess well, I'm I'm another decade older. I guess I'll you know, by default have to pick up a few more diseases along the way." You know, Eric, in Deep Medicine, you wrote it in 2019. I mean, that was 3 years before ChatGPT, which I think, you know, opened the world's eyes to certainly generative artificial intelligence. You published a ton of trials and information in Deep Medicine that looked pretty darn good to me, too. What's the honest assessment here? Like, are we on track? Is this just the pace of medical change? Or Or do you think there's like Is there stuff that's holding us back from moving faster with artificial intelligence in medicine? Yeah, there's a lot um that could have been incorporated now that isn't. So, when there's compelling evidence like a mammogram uh can be read uh with better accuracy when there's a radiologist and AI. Yeah. And this is like from a 100,000 plus women randomized trials. >> these are not small studies at all. Yeah. >> No, there's 40 studies that compare machine vision during colonoscopy with the gastroenterologist versus just a gastroenterologist. Again, 25% more polyps, and a lot of these, of course, are really precancerous polyps. Now, we have a lots more opportunities, of course, to improve accuracy. We're not using them. So, for example, um another one with mammograms is a if a woman gets a mammogram today and it's normal, there are two cleared FDA algorithms that will say, "Oh no, it's not normal. There's uh a high risk of breast cancer in the next 3 to 5 years," which is a whole different way to proceed under surveillance when you know that. Do any women get that? No. Um they don't even know about it. Uh they don't even know about what the AI uh reading could provide as far as accuracy. And that kind is across the board for radiology. But what will it take? Well, we haven't seen a randomized real-world medicine trial. So, you could say, if you're a doctor today, you say, "Well, I'm waiting for compelling evidence." But, you know, if I I pick Waymo as the proof of superhuman performance. >> I can probably look out my window and see one just right now. They're everywhere here in San Francisco. >> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the data from Waymo, they've been very transparent about it. 93% reduction of um significant car accidents. Wow. I mean 40,000 deaths each year from car accidents. And if you could extrapolate that from Waymo's data of 120 million miles. So what we're seeing with that, which is, you know, that's pretty complicated thing about driving on roads and not, you know, hitting anybody, killing anybody. So when we roll this out just think what that's going to like fully in medicine. That's a precedent. And it is saving lives. But we have to give it time. Remember, that whole deal with Waymo, that took like, you know, 12, 15 years. Yeah. And we are anxious to see, oh, well, when is this going to get? Well, medicine moves slower than autonomous driving. So this is a problem every single time I've tried to forecast what's going to happen in medicine, I'm off by many years, decade. I may have got it right, but I got the wrong year or when this is going to finally arrive. We surveyed over 1,000 physicians. About 67% of them are using AI daily. Now, obviously we're going to skew we're going to skew more towards, you know, kind of tech-enabled physicians. And almost all of them like think I think like 85% say it makes them better at their job. But about 80% are not satisfied with their employers AI adoption. >> Yeah. And so I wonder how much of it is you know, it's it and that friction there between the individual and the kind of health system, how much of that is liability, risk, cost. Yeah. So the health systems, of course, cost of these uh models to use is one issue. But also not that many, you know, a lot of these have been researched at the tech titans like Google DeepMind and Microsoft. They haven't even gotten them through FDA for commercial use. A lot of startups have, but they also charge a lot. So that's one issue and just like the ambient uh conversations made into notes and taking on a lot of these administrative data clerk tasks, that costs money to the health system to do it. So that's one thing. Liability, yes. Uh but I think the other problem is for the most part we have to get this evidence solidified. Because a lot of the evidence of using widespread gene genAI in patient management communication is not in the real world. It's with patient actors. And with these, you know, CPCs of the New England Journal and these cases. We got to get some hard evidence. I hope we get that soon because that's going to help propel the field forward. And I've seen data that it really does need to be drilled down to at least the specialty level. Like, you know, you can get pretty decent I mean this was probably a year ago. There was a study showing pretty decent responses to multiple choice questions for internal medicine, cardiology, nephrology, whatever it was. But then switch to anesthesiology or pediatrics and these models were, you know, three times worse. And so it really does depend on their training data. We really probably are going to have to do these at multiple validation levels, too. Yeah, and you also brought up another point, which is the training in AI. So what was interesting is Pernaj Rashperker and I wrote a up in the New York Times and it was about the seven studies that the AI for performance was alone was compared to the doctor with AI. And all seven of these studies the AI did better than the doctor with AI. I mean, you know, who would have predicted that? Now, is that because the doctors are not commissioned, they're not trained with AI? Is it because they don't they have a bias against AI and they have, you know, this automation negativity? What's going on here? There's one other point to make here. We doctors make lots of mistakes and errors. And we don't acknowledge that and we're holding AI to a, you know, different level of account. AI is not allowed to make any error. Well, you know, if we if we wait that long we're going to miss the opportunity because we have 800,000 or so diagnostic errors a year in the US as the Johns Hopkins group has documented of permanent disability or death. I mean, we're not just talking about the 12 million errors. We're talking about how many got disability or death. I mean, this is horrible. So we do need help. We do need help and, you know, the gift of time will help some because then you think about stuff more, but if you have a an AI to work with that you understand, it's kind of it's it's limits and it's benefits, that's going to help a lot, too. You wrote in, I think Superagers actually, you said, "We realized we'd stumbled across a shocking realization, everything was personal." And so, you know, you are like such a renowned evidence and evidence-based medicine guy, how do we draw conclusions or predict things if everything starts to just get unique and individualized, right? We have for for decades we have, you know, lumped patients together so that we can draw conclusions from cohorts of people and say we say, "Oh, well, this, you know, the the blinded, randomized, double-blind controlled trial showed that this group of people who got statins had this outcome and this group who got the control had this other outcome." How do we do that when everything starts to become personalized? You know, we've relied on randomized trials as the best solid evidence. And when you think about these trials and the number needed to treat, let's say you did a trial of intervention, you know, in thousands of participants and you had a 30% reduction of death. Sure. >> Or something big, right? And you say, "Oh, wow, that's fantastic, you know, okay. Well, it our randomized trials, first of all, they're skewed of who gets into the trials, uh but even moreover, what about the 70% who didn't get benefit? And that benefit of 30%, that maybe from going from, you know, four to three or or whatever, you know, a small amount. What about, you know, the much almost all the people in the trial who had no benefit? So, it's a very fuzzy way to to nail down whether intervention works. And we accept that. Yes. >> Now, what I'm submitting is that's with treating people with kind of undifferentiated. And then, yeah, we'll do these subgroup analyses, you know, then you got already small numbers, you don't know what the hell it means. What about if we had the full stack of data for each person? Yeah. We had their electronic health records, all of them, not just the one one provider. We had their uh labs, we had the AI of their labs, which picks up things even in the normal range that we as clinicians dismiss. We have their retina that picks up everything, the whole body. We have their organ clocks, we have their polygenic risk scores, their genome sequence, their environmental exposure. So, we're going to have that. We are getting to a point, including the immune system, uh where we'll have a stack of data. And we're going to say with multimodal AI, "You're at risk for this and that. You You will benefit from this or that." So, we're moving to a different type of medicine. Uh it isn't going to be treating uh randomized trials will still exist, they'll still be useful, but like for these natural experiments, you know, the natural experiments I mentioned like for shingles and there's many other examples, there's no randomization, there's just huge numbers of people that just happened to get this intervention, you know, one day off of whatever and of their birthdays. Uh so, we learn we have other ways to learn. I mean, someday we're going to have digital twin. We're going to have a billion people around the world with their stack of data and we're going to say, "You know, Graham, we found you we found your twins. We found your nearest neighbors that are just like you." Yeah. They're they're they're replicas of you and this is what happened in their life and this is what helped them, this is what hurt them. These are new ways that only became possible with stacks of data for each person. This is the biggest question that I have, my biggest worry, and I I honestly don't know the answer to that. So, I'm I'm I'm hopeful you have a way to at least think about this. You know, you wrote, I think in Deep Medicine you wrote, "The The machine will see things humans will never see." Yes. You know, in the in the ER, I rely on my gestalt all the time. You know, it's it's it's not just the vital signs, it's not just the way the patient, you know, eyeballs, but like the the general sense of like, "I think there might be something really bad going on here." How does that work with today's med students, today's pre-med students as they start to go through their medical training if the AI kind of starts to give them the answer immediately? Yeah, you're bringing up a a really important concept. Um in the New Yorker today, there was an article, "Are We Getting Stupider?" And also deskilling or non-skilling, you know. Yeah, so that uh ability to assimilate a person's story and data, that's, you know, the essentiality of medicine. Uh but but I think it can be improved with, you know, augmented with help of AI, so you don't miss anything. Um, because we are not good at, you know, pulling in all the data. It's just too many clicks on too many pages and, you know, um, how do you get out go out to other providers data and look at every lab data point, you know, that's not our power. Our power though is conveying, you know, communicating with patients and that wisdom and judgment and, you know, and our oversight. So, I think they do ultimately they will complement. But, uh, I am concerned about young people getting deskilled or never un-skilled in that way. Yes, and there's even evidence of that among gastroenterologists already with with this at least one study. So, this is something we got to keep an eye on. Um, it's it's part of the threat of AI in general, not just in medicine, of course. And then, Eric, my last question, are doctors cooked? Are we hosed in the la- in the long term in 20, 30, 50 years? Maybe, you know, right around the time I retire. I mean, what is the role of the human physician? Will AI make us better or will it make us an obsolete profession? Well, I'm very optimistic, of course, and I do think it's going to make this profession extraordinary. They're going to have much more accuracy. We're going to have much more of a humanistic, you know, uh, way and rebuild the patient-doctor relationship that suffered. And I do think that our prevention, to me the biggest thing is that we will go into primary prevention, which you've never done in any real in meaningful way. We couldn't do it. Uh, I think we have the the, you know, the ticket to do that. So, I see medicine going forward that uh, clinicians and doctors should not be threatened. We eventually we're going to be loving this. But, of course, we in medicine have been completely onto the treatment side. Treat, treat, treat. And our treatments are generally not that great. You know? They're they're often very expensive. They have side effects. And they're often too late. Like cancer. Treat Alzheimer's when you have Alzheimer's or Parkinson's. You know, no. No. Uh, treat somebody with heart failure or heart attacks. No. We have to shift to prevent, prevent, prevent. And we cannot do that with our current human uh, limitations as as clinicians. We need help. We have the help that's emerging now. And so, that's why I'm so excited about the future. So, You know, the more I use AI, the more I feel the same way you do. I mean, the more I understand these tools, the less scared of them I am and the more I understand where my place will be to continue to help patients as well. >> Yeah, it's such a what a great asset to have um, to use. And, you know, patients are afraid of AI, many of them, uh, because they don't really understand where it comes into play. Uh, there's a backlash right now because of the fears and uh, all, you know, children, teens killing themselves with chat on from chatbots that are run amok. I mean, just there there are some definite scary things going on right now. I get that. But, you know, it's still in the early innings here. Uh, so we have to be patient and methodically hard core evidence, just, you know, plod through this and and we will get there. Well, Eric Topol, thank you so much for joining me today. Uh, really it was an absolute honor to have you on the podcast today. Well, thank you. You've been asked some of the best questions ever for me and I've really enjoyed our conversation. Keep up the great work you're you're doing. Likewise, thanks. Thanks for joining me today. For interviews with physicians creating meaningful change, check out offcall.com/podcast. You can find how I doctor on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to podcasts. We'll have new episodes weekly. This has been and continues to be Dr. Graham Walker. Stay well, stay inspired, and practice with purpose.